The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Rambler Club on the Texas border,
by W. Crispin Sheppard

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: The Rambler Club on the Texas border

Author: W. Crispin Sheppard

Release Date: June 29, 2023 [eBook #71068]

Language: English

Credits: David Edwards, David E. Brown, and the Online Distributed
         Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This book was
         produced from images made available by the HathiTrust Digital
         Library.)

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE RAMBLER CLUB ON THE TEXAS
BORDER ***


[Illustration: THE CROWD WATCHED THE POLICEMEN]




  The Rambler Club on
  the Texas Border

  BY W. CRISPIN SHEPPARD

  AUTHOR OF

  “THE RAMBLER CLUB AFLOAT”
  “THE RAMBLER CLUB’S WINTER CAMP”
  “THE RAMBLER CLUB IN THE MOUNTAINS”
  “THE RAMBLER CLUB ON CIRCLE T RANCH”
  “THE RAMBLER CLUB AMONG THE LUMBERJACKS”
  “THE RAMBLER CLUB’S AEROPLANE”
  “THE RAMBLER CLUB’S HOUSEBOAT,” etc.

  Illustrated by the Author

  [Illustration]

  THE PENN PUBLISHING COMPANY
  PHILADELPHIA
  MCMXV




  COPYRIGHT
  1915 BY
  THE PENN
  PUBLISHING
  COMPANY

  [Illustration]

  The Rambler Club on the Texas Border




Introduction


The members of the Rambler Club of Kingswood, Wisconsin,--Bob Somers,
Dave Brandon, Tom Clifton, Dick Travers and Sam Randall,--have taken
advantage of an opportunity to visit the state of Texas. Shortly after
their arrival, Cranny Beaumont, an old-time friend, comes on to pay
them a visit. And whenever Cranny is around adventures and excitement
of some sort always seem to follow.

The crowd is thrown a great deal in the company of the Texas Rangers,
the “policemen of the plains,” who have many achievements to their
credit in the suppression of lawlessness along the border and elsewhere
in the Lone Star State.

Four of the lads, in the company of two travelers, cross the famous Rio
Grande del Norte and enter Mexico, which at this time is shaken by some
of the most troublous events in all of its stormy and eventful history.

In a little frontier town they meet a newspaper man and a mysterious
young pianist, and through a peculiar combination of circumstances are
plunged into the midst of a series of thrilling adventures.

What happens to the pianist and how a certain event plays a very
important part in the career of Cranny Beaumont is related in this
story.

Other books telling of the adventures of the club are:

“The Rambler Club Afloat,” “The Rambler Club’s Winter Camp,” “The
Rambler Club in the Mountains,” “The Rambler Club on Circle T Ranch,”
“The Rambler Club Among the Lumberjacks,” “The Rambler Club’s Gold
Mine,” “The Rambler Club’s Aeroplane,” “The Rambler Club’s Houseboat,”
“The Rambler Club’s Motor Car,” “The Rambler Club’s Ball Nine,” “The
Rambler Club’s Football Team,” “The Rambler Club With the Northwest
Mounted,” “The Rambler Club’s Motor Yacht.”




Contents


      I. CRANNY                            9

     II. MACHINE GUNS                     21

    III. THE RANGERS                      33

     IV. THE INVADERS                     46

      V. NEW FRIENDS                      53

     VI. IN THE SADDLE                    65

    VII. SCOUTING                         77

   VIII. IN MEXICO                        89

     IX. A LONE HORSEMAN                  99

      X. MOVING PICTURES                 108

     XI. SOLDIERS                        117

    XII. RIFLE SHOTS                     129

   XIII. THE STORM BREAKS                134

    XIV. THE STAMPEDE                    148

     XV. THE FIGHT                       154

    XVI. A WILD RACE                     167

   XVII. A NIGHT IN THE OPEN             174

  XVIII. ON THE TRACK OF “RUSTLERS”      186

    XIX. CAPTURED BY COWBOYS             204

     XX. UNDER FIRE                      223

    XXI. THE FUSILLADE                   238

   XXII. KIDNAPPING JIMMY                257

  XXIII. SAFE AGAIN IN TEXAS             273

   XXIV. JIMMY GETS BACK                 289

    XXV. CAPTURING THE “RUSTLERS”        307

   XXVI. GOOD-BYE TO THE RANGERS         315




Illustrations

                                                 PAGE

  THE CROWD WATCHED THE POLICEMEN      _Frontispiece_

  “INTO THE SADDLE, BOYS!”                         73

  ONCE MORE HE TURNED                             149

  “OWN UP--NOW!”                                  206

  SILENTLY THE LADS OBSERVED THEM                 261




The Rambler Club on the Texas Border




CHAPTER I

CRANNY


“Honestly, fellows, I can hardly keep from shouting hip, hip,
hurrah--rah, rah, rah, all the time. Just think, here we are, out for
adventure. Yes, I’ve got to let it go. Rah, rah, rah for the Ramblers,
and ditto for the Texas Rangers!”

It was a big, husky-looking chap who uttered this rapid flow of words,
and the shout which ended his sentence rang through the spacious square
room of the ranch-house so lustily that his hearers, a crowd of six
boys and two men, broke into a storm of laughter.

The shining eyes of Cranny Beaumont, once of Kingswood, Wisconsin,
and later of Tacoma, Washington, would have told of his delight and
exuberant spirits without this corroborative evidence. And his
companions, or at least the boys, looked just as happy as he.

The Rambler Club and Cranny Beaumont, the impetuous, the reckless, the
daring but always rollicking, light-hearted lad, were once more in each
other’s company and eager for the adventurous life which they hoped
would be theirs for a few weeks to come.

It was rather an odd assortment of boys and men which lounged
informally about the room. Beside the five Ramblers,--Bob Somers,
Dave Brandon, Tom Clifton, Dick Travers, Sam Randall and their friend
Don Stratton, the son of a New Orleans financier,--there were present
Sergeant Robson Howell and Private Carl Alvin of the Ranger force at
Texas.

Dave Brandon and Tom Clifton were easily the most conspicuous members
of the club. The former, stout, round-faced, with twinkling eyes that
betrayed a wealth of good humor, was an excellent foil to the tall,
active Tom, whose shoulders, now broadening out, gave him quite the
appearance of a formidable athlete.

All the lads with the exception of Don Stratton showed the beneficial
effects of outdoor life. Clear skins, cheeks flushed with the ruddy hue
of health, and keen steady eyes stamped each with an air of vigor and
strength.

Cranny Beaumont hadn’t lived out in the open as much as his friends,
but to none did that life hold a stronger appeal. As he ceased pacing
the floor, to come to a halt before the window, his eyes rested upon
two brown-patched mustangs tethered to hitching-posts near the broad
flight of steps which led to the entrance. To him these restless,
stamping animals, surcharged with life, dynamic with force and energy,
seemed fairly to breathe the spirit of the plains. In his mind’s eye he
could see those vast reaches, the great herds of cattle roaming over
them and the cowboys on their lonely rounds. It was a pleasant picture
to contemplate, even though it loomed only in the shadowy depths of his
imagination, and a loud whoop almost involuntarily escaped his lips.

“I suppose that means a contented spirit,” remarked Sergeant Howell
with a grin.

“I should say so,” gurgled Cranny. “Now, fellows----”

“Look here, let’s get down to business,” interrupted Tom Clifton, in
a voice which almost possessed the depth and gruffness of the burly
sergeant’s. “Fire away, Cranny. You know----”

“I know that I don’t know a whole lot of things about your last trip,”
said the Tacoma lad, with a shake of his head. “Go ahead, somebody. I’m
listening.”

When Cranny Beaumont spoke in a certain tone and squared his jaw there
was generally nothing to do but to accede to his wishes, and Tom,
knowing this, figuratively stepped into the spot-light. He told about
the business which had brought the crowd to New Orleans, of their
unexpected voyage on the Gulf of Mexico aboard Mr. Stratton’s power
yacht, and of their still more unexpected and thrilling adventures in
the troubled land of Mexico.

It was there the crowd had fallen in with Carl Alvin, the Texas Ranger,
at that time on a furlough, and the idea had come to them to spend a
few weeks among those famous policemen of the Lone Star State. Alvin
was delighted at the idea, and this, in connection with the lure of
the open-air life, proved irresistible.

So, in the Ranger’s company, the Ramblers and Don, who succeeded in
gaining his father’s permission, had journeyed from the oil district of
Tampico, Mexico, to Brownsville, Texas, and thence to a small town on
the Rio Grande.

“My, what a great time you’ve had!” exclaimed Cranny. “By George, I
only hope I’ll run into something just as full of ginger.”

“Not for me,” said Don Stratton, decidedly. “Gingery affairs of that
kind are all well enough to read about, but when it comes to the real
thing I’d rather be excused.”

“Well, boys,” broke in the sergeant, “we must be getting along now.
Just stepped in to say howdy-do.” A grin crossed his weather-beaten
face which was burned to a coppery hue by the sun’s hot rays. “Ride
over to headquarters whenever you feel like it,” his glance fell on
Cranny--“and don’t try too hard to run into adventures, my lad, or----”

His sentence, concluded by a significant gesture of a big brown hand,
plainly conveyed his meaning, and caused the Ramblers to chuckle with
mirth.

“The sergeant has you sized up all right, Cranny,” exclaimed Tom. He
intended to speak in a low, confidential tone, but every one in the
room plainly heard his words. “I say, old chap, it wouldn’t be possible
to have a nice, quiet time with you along, eh?”

“Not if I could help it,” grinned Cranny. He faced the burly Howell.
“You’ll see us come over, Sergeant. Honestly, I’m just pinin’ to get a
glimpse o’ that bunch o’ Rangers.”

“An’ I guess all of ’em will be just as glad to see you,” remarked Carl
Alvin. “If there’s anything a Ranger likes, it’s a chap brimful of
grit.” He eyed the big Tacoma lad critically. “And if I’m not mistaken
you’ve got the goods.”

“Thanks!” laughed Cranny.

The two Rangers picked up their rifles, which rested in a near-by
corner, and with the crowd following at their heels walked out on the
wide veranda which extended entirely around the old rambling building.

Good-byes were said. Then the crowd watched the policemen untie their
fiery mustangs and swing themselves into the saddle. The animals kicked
up their heels, shot forward, then settling into a loping trot carried
them swiftly away.

On all sides of the house stretched a broad undulating prairie covered
with long waving grass which sparkled in the light of a cloudless day.
To the southwest, seen as flat, gray masses against a sky of dazzling
brilliancy, rose the low, irregular hills of Mexico, just across the
Rio Grande. Northward, a line of cottonwoods and oaks fringed the
border of an unseen watercourse, and dotted over the great expanse were
groups of trees or other vegetation.

Amid this immensity of space the figures of the rapidly retreating
horsemen seemed to be dwarfed to mere pigmy proportions; but even
from afar the rays of the sun, striking on pistol butts or trappings,
continued to send back spots of flashing light.

Cranny Beaumont drew a long breath. With all the eagerness of a bird
which sees the door of its cage open and freedom before it he observed
these vast reaches extending off to a hazy distance. How different
it was from being cooped up in a city office, a din of clicking
typewriters continually sounding in his ears!

“Well, fellows!” he said.

And then such a curiously sober look chased away his expression of
whole-hearted enjoyment that Tom spoke up:

“What’s the matter, Cranny?”

“Tell us the secret sorrow,” chirped Dick.

The big Tacoma lad seated himself on the veranda railing, where with
one foot swinging forth and back like a pendulum, he began to grin
almost sheepishly.

“Say, fellows, the fact is I’m a--a--oh, hang it all, you might as well
know--a--a--failure.”

“For goodness’ sake!” cried Tom--“a failure?”

“Terrible indeed to hear such a confession from one so old!” mused Dave.

“Yes, sir--or sirs--a flat failure; even a steam roller couldn’t make
it flatter.”

“Hist--hist! Another case of life’s young dream forever shattered!”
gurgled Don Stratton.

“Oh, it may sound very funny to you chaps,” said Cranny, “but honest to
goodness, I feel pretty serious--or at least I do sometimes.”

“Go ahead, Cranny,” laughed Bob. “We’re listening now.”

“I’ve been intending to tell you ever since the train dropped me, about
an hour ago, at that station back yonder and your nag, Bob, carried us
over here--a hefty weight for one little horse-power, eh?”

“Stick to the point at issue,” said the Rambler, in judicial tones.

“I’ve been working in dad’s real estate office off an’ on for a long
time, you know; but I couldn’t get down to the clockwork thing. It was
late in the morning--late gettin’ back at lunch time, an’--an’----”

“Early leaving at night, I s’pose?” suggested Dick.

“Rather. Well, at last dad simply wouldn’t stand for it any longer,
an’--an’ I don’t blame him.”

“Neither do we,” grinned Sam.

“When I received a letter from Bob Somers telling me the crowd was
going to spend a short time with the Texas Rangers I got an idea.”

“Fine! Let’s share it,” cried Dick.

“Dad could have found me a job in a big wholesale house. But after
thinkin’ things over a bit I put it up to him like this: ‘Father’ I
said, ‘the Ramblers are in Texas.’ An’---- Say, boys, maybe he didn’t
laugh!”

“Why?” demanded Tom, suspiciously.

Cranny regarded the tall lad with a quizzical air. Then, like a flash,
the thoughtful expression flitted from his face. He laughed in his old,
boisterous fashion.

“Because he knew what I was going to say, Tom,” he chuckled. “Both he
and I think you’re the greatest bunch ever.”

“Off the subject again, Cranny,” Bob reminded him, severely.

“Ob, pardon me, your Honor. I told dad I simply must see the crowd.
Say, but didn’t he look--er--er----”

“Flabbergasted?” said Dick, helpfully.

“You’ve struck it. Anyway, to boil three days’ conversation down into
three minutes’ talk,--what do you think he did?” Before the others
had had a chance to put in even a single word Cranny resumed speaking.
“Why, good old dad actually consented to lend me three hundred plunks.

“Yes, sir. An’ he said”--the big lad fairly bubbled over with glee--“‘I
consent. Join Bob Somers an’ his club in Texas; but remember, Cranny,
henceforth’”--a suggestion of the sober look returned,--“‘you must
carve out your own future.’”

“Help!” grinned Dick.

“And when is the carving to begin?” asked Don.

“That’s just it,” confessed Cranny. “I--I--don’t know.”

“One thing’s sure,” pronounced Don: “your pater must be very kind and
indulgent.”

“You’re right,” agreed Cranny. “An’ you can just believe he did a
whole lot o’ thinkin’. Oh, I know.” He jumped from his perch, to begin
striding up and down. “Dad thinks I need a jolly good lesson. I reckon
he figures it out this way: In about a month or two the money’ll be all
gone--and then! But, by Jove, I won’t, no sir--I’ll--I’ll---- Say,
fellows--honest, I don’t know what I’m good for. Speak up, philosopher.”

Stout Dave Brandon smiled genially as his eyes met Cranny’s.

“A few days’ riding about the plains with the Texas Rangers is my
prescription,” he said. “The pure fresh air, the illimitable distances,
the communing with nature in all its varied aspects, the----”

“Hold on--hold on!” chortled Cranny. “You’re the same old Dave.
Fellows”--his tone changed to one of seriousness--“I want to make good
at something. But for a few weeks I’ll just chuck all the worry stuff
to the Texas winds. Dave’s right. Hooray for the Rambler Club and life
with the Rangers!”




CHAPTER II

MACHINE GUNS


The crowd had arrived in the Lone Star State only a few days before.
Traveling by rail, they reached a little town on the Rio Grande,
visited the company headquarters of the Texas Rangers, for the time
being stationed there, then put up at the rather pretentious Ledaro
Hotel.

The first thing the boys did was to hire horses and provide themselves
with firearms; the second, to ride off on a tour of the surrounding
country. A few miles out of town, crowning the summit of a gentle rise,
an abandoned ranch-house claimed their attention. Old and dilapidated,
a suggestion of romance seemed to hover about its cracked and yellowed
adobe walls. To those poetically inclined it conjured up thoughts of
the long ago, when the sun shone on a fresh, clean structure situated
amid a grassy field. But now rank weeds and scraggly bushes flourished
unchecked, while vines climbed about the wooden steps or trailed over
the veranda railing, as if to flaunt their disdain of the ruin which
time and neglect had wrought.

Dave suggested renting the place. His idea received enthusiastic
support. With Carl Alvin’s aid, they succeeded in finding the owner;
and he, possessing that hospitality for which the Southern people are
noted, promptly gave his consent, though the crowd had a difficult task
to persuade him to accept remuneration.

Don Stratton had always been accustomed to ease and luxury, and though
he couldn’t understand why the crowd should deliberately cast aside the
comforts of hotel life, he proved his gameness by offering no objection
to the plan.

So the ancient interior, in which perhaps for years the dreary silence
had only been occasionally broken by intruding rodents scurrying across
the floors or bats flapping in circular flights about the rooms, now
became the temporary home of lusty, enthusiastic youths.

According to Tom, the task of putting the lower floor into habitable
shape was jolly good fun. Many willing hands made the cleaning and
dusting occupy but a surprisingly short time. From a clump of timber
close by the boys gathered great quantities of fragrant cedar boughs;
and these, skilfully fashioned, became their beds. Then, from the
old, tumble-down stable in the rear, they obtained a supply of boards
which enabled them to construct a table and several benches, rough and
uncouth in appearance, yet strong and serviceable.

It was just about this time that the crowd had received a letter from
Cranny telling them to be on the lookout for him. And now the Tacoma
boy was actually there.

“Hooray for the Rambler Club!” repeated Cranny. “What a perfectly
rippin’ time we’re goin’ to have, fellows! Just let me get a horse, a
few shootin’ irons--then I’ll be so jolly happy I’ll----” He paused.
“Just happened to think o’ that makin’-a-livin’ business,” he explained.

“Oh, cheer up!” laughed Don. “Come along. We’ll conduct you through the
palace.”

“I’d be more cheerful than a song-bird in spring,” declared Cranny, “if
I only knew what to do.”

The tread of many feet and the sound of voices echoed uncannily
through the rooms as the lads passed from one to another. Everywhere
their eyes lighted on broken plaster, decaying boards, and many a
thick festoon of cobwebs dimly revealed itself in shadowy corners. Up
a twisting stairway they climbed to the second floor. Here Cranny,
to his surprise, always found himself coming upon unexpected rooms
and passageways,--these last, dark, somber-looking places, where the
accumulated dust of ages rose up in choking clouds.

“Been up on the roof yet, fellows?” he asked, suddenly noting in one of
the rooms a ladder resting against a trap-door.

“Of course. It was about the second thing we did,” answered Tom.
“There’s a dandy view, too.”

“Me for the roof, then,” declared Cranny.

He briskly crossed the floor; sprang up the rungs of the ladder; then
the door, in response to a vigorous shove, banged on the roof, while a
flood of whitish light poured through the opening.

Cranny immediately scrambled upward. For an instant his figure was
sharply outlined against the blue sky, then he disappeared from view.

One by one the others followed until all stood on the gently-sloping
roof, the target for a fresh, strong breeze which swept directly toward
them from the land of Mexico.

Tom’s description was not exaggerated. Here and there bright spots of a
yellowish color traced the course of the Rio Grande, and the low hills
on the opposite side were now touched with delicate purple shadows and
glowing lights.

In the vast sweep of country which their lofty perch embraced, not a
living thing was in sight. The undulating surfaces stretched far off
with the grasses billowing like waves of the sea, and finally melted
softly into a hazy sky.

“Superb!” murmured Dave.

“Gettin’ an inspiration for a poem?” asked Cranny with a chuckle.

“Almost,” laughed the stout lad, seating himself with a sigh of
satisfaction. His example was quickly followed.

Cranny still had a number of questions to ask. He wanted to know all
about their experiences since they had been in Wyoming together;
and the Ramblers, too, felt a keen interest to hear some further
particulars in regard to his own affairs at Tacoma. Naturally all this
took some time. The sun rose to the zenith and continued on its slow
journey toward the west while lively tongues rattled on. Cranny was in
the midst of a graphic description of his “failure” when a sound--a
very faint sound coming from the distance--abruptly caused him to break
off in the middle of a sentence. He glanced inquiringly toward his
companions.

“What in thunder was that?” he demanded, raising his hand. “Listen!”

“Great Scott!” cried Tom, springing to his feet, and gazing intently
toward the Mexican hills. “That must mean trouble not so very far away.”

Once more the sound, borne on the sweeping wind, came to their ears.
It was unmistakably the rattle of a machine gun, and presently a
continuous series of ominous reports convinced every one that somewhere
across the Rio Grande an engagement was taking place between Federal
and Revolutionary forces.

“By George! Fellows, I reckon if we ever got over there, we’d see some
excitement!” Cranny Beaumont’s eyes, as he spoke, were shining with
excitement. “Sounds like a hot scrap, eh?”

The Ramblers all knew the Tacoma lad’s reckless, daring nature.
Wherever any excitement was going on, there Cranny wanted to be. And
the eagerness of his expression plainly revealed the thoughts running
through his mind.

“I’d rather stay on this side of the river,” drawled Dave. He grinned
faintly. “It’s no fun, Cranny, to be anywhere in the vicinity of
bursting shells, or to hear bullets singing past one’s head.”

“We know by experience, too,” said Tom loftily.

“You bet,” chimed in Don Stratton.

“A chap wouldn’t have to run into any danger,” declared Cranny, rising
to join Tom, who stood near the edge of the roof. “Some day----” The
lad paused, but the sparkle hadn’t faded from his eyes, nor the notes
of suppressed excitement from his voice.

“He’s always out for adventure,” said Bob to Dave.

“Yes, and always bound to find it,” returned the other.

As the faint notes of warfare continued, sometimes barely perceptible
above the sighing of the breeze, then again booming forth clearly, the
nerves of all were tingling.

“How glad I am we’re neutral,” remarked Dave.

“How I’d like to be in an aeroplane lookin’ down upon it,” declared
Cranny.

Finally the distant guns spoke at longer intervals, and at length
ceased altogether.

“Yes,” said the Tacoma lad reflectively, “a jaunt into old Mexico
would---- Oh, don’t shake your head, Dave--I reckon I’ll have to go--so
near, you know. What! Lunch time already? By Jove! I’d almost forgotten
about it. Let’s hurry--I want to hire that nag this afternoon.”

Recklessly he sprang for the trap-door, and several times the ladder
threatened to collapse beneath the weight of the boys as they piled
back into the room.

When they reached the lower floor, Tom explained to Cranny that he was
“chef” for the afternoon.

“To-night Don takes a crack at it,” he added.

“And I reckon you’ll all want to take a crack at me after the frost is
over,” grinned Don.

The Ramblers immediately got things under way. Dick kindled a fire in
the old-fashioned open-grate; Bob brought forth the provisions and tin
dishes, while stout Dave and Sam attended to various odds and ends.

Tom went about his duties with a stern and determined air, and Cranny,
watching him with twinkling eyes, was before very long sniffing some
delicious odors. A monster coffee-pot generously let the nature of its
contents be known, and beans baked the day before in true lumberman’s
style, now having the finishing touches supplied, helped to indicate
that this meal at least would be no “frost.”

When the chef finally cried, “Fall in, fellows,” the others obeyed his
summons with wonderful alacrity, and in a few moments the good things
began to vanish like a flurry of snowflakes in the early spring.

About an hour later the boys were in the stable.

“Ho, for that little Mexican town, and the Texas Rangers!” exclaimed
Cranny. Then his eyes traveling over the mustangs he added, “A corkin’
fine pony o’ yours, Bob.” He critically examined the brown-patched
animal when the Rambler a moment later led it forth into the light.

No friendly look greeted Cranny from a pair of dark, intelligent eyes.
And at almost every sound the mustang’s shaggy sides quivered; its ears
were thrown back, while four active hoofs suggested the advisability of
keeping a considerable distance away.

“H’m--a jolly bad-tempered little beast,” commented the lad.

“Here’s the horse-dealer’s description of him,” laughed Bob. “‘He’s
hardy as a cactus, vicious as a rattler, and as ungrateful as a coyote,
but he certainly can go.’”

“Well, I only hope that I can find one just like him,” declared
Cranny. “They can’t be too gingery for me.”

It was a pretty difficult job to saddle “Whirly-gig,” but Bob
accomplished the task with an ease that brought an admiring comment
from the big Tacoma lad.

“You’re as clever as a cow-puncher in a wild-west show, Bob,” he
chuckled.

“Thanks,” laughed the other. “Whoa! old boy,” he patted the pony’s
neck. “Ready, fellows? Whoa--come along then!”

A clatter of hoofs echoed noisily throughout the dingy old building as
the horses one by one were led outside.

“Into the saddle, boys,” cried Bob, springing into his own. “Jump up,
Cranny--look out.”

Cranny, active, alert, his eyes shining with pleasure, had need to heed
this caution. The mustang, “Whirly-gig,” apparently having no desire
for a repetition of his early morning experience, was exhibiting a
tendency to buck and dance.

Seizing a favorable moment, he matched his speed with the pony’s and
won. Then almost simultaneously six mustangs leaped forward, soon to
settle down into a steady, loping trot.

And a few minutes later, bathed in the bright clear sunlight, horses
and riders became but tiny, far-off specks amid the ever-billowing
grasses of the plain.




CHAPTER III

THE RANGERS


The importance of the little Texas town on the Rio Grande could not
in justice be estimated by the size of its population. Situated in a
thriving agricultural district, and near a stock-raising region, with
ore deposits and coal lands to be found not far away, it had gradually
developed into a center of trade for the surrounding country.

Founded by the Spaniards almost one hundred and fifty years before,
some portions of the town still bore a faint impress of their
domination in the quaint, pleasing architecture of the buildings.
Others again were as characteristically Mexican in appearance as though
belonging to towns on the other side of the Rio.

The demands of a rapid, hustling, up-to-date age, however, was bringing
about a change. Modern buildings sprang up, overtopping their
primitive, adobe neighbors, and, like the cattlemen retreating before
the steady advance of the homesteaders and farmers, a certain element
of charm was slowly vanishing from this frontier town.

Its inhabitants, too, were as varied in character as the streets.
Cow-punchers, Mexican vaqueros and men of business, such as might
be seen in any Eastern city, mingled together. The Mexicans,
usually long-haired and swarthy, their costumes often enlivened by
gaudily-colored sashes or handkerchiefs, furnished perhaps the most
picturesque note.

The traveler who stopped here was apt to have his ears assailed by a
strange jargon of tongues. Sometimes it was English, sometimes Spanish,
or it might be a curious combination of the two.

An International bridge connected the town with another, considerably
smaller in size, on the Mexican side of the river. The railroad also
crossed at this point.

A company headquarters of Texas Rangers which had been located in
this section of Texas for some time was in charge of Captain Julius
Braddock. The officer, an old-time cattleman, had passed most of his
life on the plains. In the early part of his career the “bad man” of
the border and elsewhere occupied a far more conspicuous position than
he does in this age, when civilization is constantly reaching farther
and farther afield. And he could tell, and often did, stories of actual
experiences with cattle rustlers and other desperate characters, which
made the usual motion-picture drama on the same subject appear by
comparison quite tame indeed.

Captain Braddock was sitting at his desk in one corner of the big room,
when the door suddenly opened, and, on looking up in surprise, he saw a
great crowd of boys pushing their way inside.

“Hello!” he exclaimed, the stern lines on his rugged, weather-beaten
face relaxed into a smile of welcome. “You all here again, and--’pon my
word--what? Still another?”

He rose to his feet and advanced to a rail, his keen gray eyes fixed on
Cranny Beaumont’s smiling face.

“Yes, sir; still another,” echoed the lad with a chuckle. “How are you,
Captain Braddock?--the boys have told me all about you.”

After a more formal introduction by Bob Somers, breezy Cranny began
to chat with all his accustomed ease and frankness. He told him about
his plans; about the “cracker-jack” nag called “Starlight” he had just
hired from a horse-dealer in town; he mentioned a rifle and revolver
bought but a few minutes before, and altogether managed to impress the
bluff old captain most favorably.

“So you’re out for adventure before settling down to the more serious
pursuits of life,” he said finally, with a twinkle in his eye.

“Yes, sir,” replied Cranny. “I say, Captain, has there been anythin’
doin’ around here lately?”

The officer looked thoughtful.

“Quite a great deal,” he answered slowly.

“To-day, from the roof of our ranch-house, we heard the sound of
firing!” broke in Tom.

“I am not surprised,” said Captain Braddock. “Reports to the effect
that the Mexicans were fighting close to the river reached us. The
Federals are now in possession of the opposite town, but I understand
that an army of Constitutionalists is encamped not twenty miles away.”

“Gracious!” murmured Cranny.

“What an unfortunate state of affairs!” put in Dave. “If the warring
factions could only get together and put as much energy in developing
the wonderful resources of their country as they do in fighting, how
much more sensible it would be!”

The Tacoma lad scarcely heard this observation. To one of his reckless,
adventurous temperament, the thought of actually visiting a town where
such stirring events were possible held an irresistible attraction
for him. He made up his mind to run over to the other side of the Rio
before very long--even if he had to make the trip alone.

The sound of their voices presently brought several of the Rangers,
Carl Alvin among them, from an adjoining room.

The members of the force did not have the spick and span appearance of
the scarlet-coated Royal Northwest Mounted Police of Canada, among whom
the Ramblers had spent some time the summer before. A certain bearing,
however, gained through years of hard service, was sufficiently
authoritative without additional embellishments.

“Hello, fellows! Mighty glad to see you,” hailed Carl Alvin. He turned
to the others. “These are the chaps I told you about.”

Thereupon he introduced the crowd to big Tom Raulings, Oscar Chaney and
Jack Stovall.

“Well, what do you youngsters think you’re goin’ to do out here,
anyway?” drawled Jack, chuckling audibly.

“For one thing--trail the Rangers a bit,” grinned Cranny. “We want to
find out what their job’s like. My--it must be dandy fun, ridin’ around
the country all day, an’----”

“I’ll wager them there notions won’t stick long in your head,” put in
Jim. “’Tain’t no easy snap.”

“But in the old days things was a heap worse,” exclaimed Stovall, the
youngest of the four. “Then Texas was full o’ outlaw bands an’ cattle
rustlers. The ranchmen and cow-punchers used to have some mighty hot
times, an’ the man who was slow on the draw didn’t stan’ much show!”

“You’re right there, Jack,” affirmed Captain Braddock. “I know, for
I’ve seen a bit of gun play in my time.”

“Here’s what I mean, fellers,” went on Stovall.

Walking to the center of the room he began to give an exhibition of
“the draw.” From almost every conceivable position, both on the ground
and standing, the tall, raw-boned Texan showed with what remarkable
rapidity and dexterity a man can draw his pistol and aim.

The boys enthusiastically applauded his efforts.

“Thanks; glad ye like it,” said Stovall, with a broad grin. “Whew!
Maybe I ain’t some hot after all that.”

“Say, Jack, do you chaps have any drills?” asked Tom Clifton.

“Drills?” repeated Stovall. “An’ what for, I’d like to know?”

Captain Braddock, with a laugh at the scorn expressed in the Ranger’s
voice, now excused himself, a proceeding which Dave promptly took
advantage of by starting toward the nearest bench.

“I’m uncommonly tired, fellows,” he explained.

“Drills!” remarked Jack a second time, when all were comfortably
seated. “No siree! An’ why? ’cause no chap ever gits appointed to the
force unless he’s shown beforehand he’s got the goods!”

“How many men are in this company?” asked Bob.

“Besides the cap’n and sergeant, there’s fifteen privates. Altogether
we have four companies o’ Rangers. One quartermaster acts as commissary
an’ paymaster for the whole business.”

“That’s a pretty big job, eh?”

“You can just believe it is. He has to make his accounting to the
adjutant-general of the state. An’ of course the company commanders
send in their reports to him, too. Whenever a detail from a company or
detachment headquarters is forced to be away longer’n twenty-four hours
the cap’n must report the object of the expedition, the reasons for it
and the name of the Ranger in charge.”

“Yes; an’ this company is about as busy as any,” put in Chaney. “You
see, onct in a while, when Mexican bandits find it gettin’ too hot for
’em in their own country they take a little trip over the Rio Grande,
an’ our job is to see that they don’t stay here long.”

“How much authority have you?” asked Tom.

“Enough to make a whole lot of tough characters fight mighty shy of
us,” spoke up Alvin. “The act of the legislature covering our case
speaks of a ‘rangers force for the protection of the frontier against
marauding and thieving parties and for the suppression of lawlessness
and crime throughout the state.’”

“We aid the regular civil authorities,” explained Raulings. “When an
arrest is made the Rangers must convey the prisoner to the county in
whose jurisdiction he was at the time of the commission of the crime.”

“Then sometimes you get a bully chance to see the country,” said Don.

“Yes. I’ve even ridden in real trains while in the discharge of my
duties,” laughed Oscar Chaney.

“What weapons do you carry?” asked Cranny.

“A Winchester rifle and a pistol,” answered Alvin. “They are supplied
to us at cost.”

“But we’ve got to furnish our own horses an’ clothing,” said Raulings.

“Suppose somebody should draw a bead on your nag, and the next minute
he keeled over; what then?” inquired Cranny.

“When a horse is killed in action the state gives another free of
charge.”

“There’s a detachment from this company temporarily located many
miles from here, an’ this bunch is detailed to take a ride over there
to-morrow,” put in Stovall. “We’ll be ridin’ within sight o’ your old
ranch-house early in the morning. Want to come along?”

“I should say so!” declared Cranny, enthusiastically.

“Yes siree,” said Tom.

“We’re off on scoutin’ expeditions all the time,” explained Raulings.
“An’ that means roughin’ it enough to suit anybody. This here one----”
The Ranger stopped suddenly, his eyes roved in the direction of the
captain; then, seeing no movement on the latter’s part he resumed in a
lower tone, “An’ this here one----”

“Oh, pshaw! Man--there isn’t any secret about it,” interrupted Stovall,
impatiently. “Speak up!”

“Yes; fire away!” urged Cranny, the flashing light which so often came
into his eyes now strongly in evidence.

“Wal, rustlers have started up work ag’in! Cattle is gettin’ stole
right an’ left.”

“Rustlers!” broke in Tom, interestedly.

“Yes. An’ the job o’ this here bunch o’ Texas Rangers is to ketch them
fellers or run ’em out o’ the state,” declared Stovall. The lines on
his youthful face became hard and stern. “The ranchmen are mighty
hot about it, too. There’s Colonel Sylvester of the ‘Eagle Pass’
Ranch--some o’ his stock is missin’ an’----”

Cranny Beaumont rose to his feet.

“Fellows!” he exclaimed impressively. “I wonder if we’re going to run
into any excitement!”

“Don’t think of such things, Cranny,” begged Dave. “I’m just longing
for a nice quiet trip.”

“Haven’t you any clues?” asked Bob.

“Nary a one,” responded Jack. “I reckon, though, it’s the work of a
purty well organized band o’ outlaws.”

“An’ to change the subject, boys,” interposed Raulings, “don’t forget
that little job we have on hand for Colonel Sylvester. The last time I
saw him he was all worked-up about that kid.”

Ranger Chaney was the only one who heard this speech, for at that
precise moment all the boys rose to their feet, which, together with
Cranny’s boisterous laughter at some observation of Dave’s, and a
lively rattle of tongues, proved quite sufficient to distract the
others’ attention.

“I reckon he’s skipped from these parts a’ready,” remarked Chaney.

“An’ I reckon he ain’t,” returned the other.

A few minutes later the crowd took leave of the Rangers, promising to
keep a sharp lookout for them on the following morning.

Cranny Beaumont was in a very happy frame of mind. The Tacoma lad had
another interesting subject to occupy his mind just now--the cattle
rustlers. And it would be a mighty strange thing, he thought, if
between them and a visit to the Mexican side of the “Rio Bravo” he
didn’t run into some kind of excitement before his visit to Texas was
over. And excitement to Cranny seemed almost as necessary to existence
as food and drink.




CHAPTER IV

THE INVADERS


The moon had risen and was casting a pale, greenish radiance over the
picturesque little town, when the seven, who had been seated on the
spacious veranda of a restaurant, reluctantly decided that it was time
to go. Under the magic of the soft illumination the harshness of line
and color had departed. Even the grim-looking grain elevator near the
railroad tracks, a flat mass of bluish gray rising against a luminous
sky, wore an aspect of calm serenity which fitted well into a scene
full of silvery lights and mysterious shadows.

“Ah, how superb is nature,” sighed Dave.

“What a superb meal we had,” chuckled Don.

“An’ what a superb ride is before us,” chimed in Cranny.

He was the first to dash down the wooden steps, the first to spring
into the saddle, and he also led the procession of riders which
presently swung into the broad white road.

Waving their hands in response to salutations from several interested
spectators, the boys allowed the mustangs to break into a lively
gallop, which they kept up until the railroad crossing was reached.
There, a long line of slowly-moving freight cars filled with crates of
onions barred their way.

“Huh!” said Tom, “I guess there’s enough of ’em to melt the whole world
to tears.”

“This little Texas town,” remarked Sam quite solemnly, “enjoys the
distinction of being one of the largest onion-shipping points in the
world.”

“Do tell,” grinned Cranny.

“And you might as well learn that the soil is good for all sorts of
truck and farm products. Figs, grapes, watermelons, cantaloupes, and
cabbages.”

“That sounds like a Chamber of Commerce booklet,” laughed Dick.

“When knowledge is being disseminated, don’t interrupt,” said Sam
severely.

“I say, Mr. Speaker, where did you capture that last word?” gurgled
Cranny. “Don’t spring anythin’ like that again so suddenly or----”

The lad did not complete his sentence for the cars had rattled by and
the impatient mustangs, like hounds unleashed, abruptly started off on
their own accord.

At a rapid pace the seven clattered along. The houses became farther
and farther apart until finally the last one was reached and left
behind, and they saw stretching before them a broad undulating country.

Beneath a grove of cottonwoods by the side of the road they reined up.

“Hello!” exclaimed Cranny, looking behind. “There’s that little Mexican
town.”

“So it is,” said Tom.

They could see a few twinkling lights, some apparently poised in space,
and a darkish patch stretching across the Rio--the International bridge.

Half an hour later, now on the open prairie, the boys had halted once
more. Their eyes were following a train on the railroad, which had its
terminus at a rapidly growing settlement on the river about twenty-five
miles away. They watched the tiny starlike points of light blinking
from the car windows, now flashing into view, now blotted from sight,
as intervening objects came between, with an interest born of the
solitude and silence which surrounded them.

“Fine,” said Cranny, “but I’m glad I’m not aboard. Ha, ha! Just think,
Sergeant Howell doesn’t want us to go out huntin’ for adventures.”

“We never have to,” returned Sam, quite truthfully, “for our crowd is
always running into them.”

“I do hope this trip will be an exception,” said Dave, with a yawn.
“What do you say, Bob?”

“Either way suits me,” laughed the other.

“I’m watchfully waiting for something to start pretty soon,” remarked
Dick, laughingly. “Better be prepared, Dave, old chap.”

“Come on, fellows,” cried Cranny.

The boys were soon following an old cattle trail. The hoofs of
countless animals, which for years had followed this route to the town,
had beaten a path almost as plainly marked in places as though the hand
of man had taken part in its making.

“Just think of the thousands and thousands,” said Tom, thoughtfully.
“My, mustn’t it take an awful number of cattle to supply the world?”

“The state of Texas does its share,” declared Dave. “Why, in San
Antonio County alone, an area as great as Belgium, Holland and Denmark
could be tucked away and still there would be plenty of space to spare.”

“Well,” said Cranny, “no wonder everything around here looks so big.”

Soon the party reached a dense thicket of chaparral, which merged
into a brake of cottonwoods and willows, interspersed with mesquite
and prickly pears. The moonbeams filtered through the dense masses of
vegetation in silvery streaks; here spotting the tree trunks, there
detaching branches and leaves from the shadowy, mysterious background.

The soft, musical sighings and rustlings, as the breeze stole through
this leafy coverlet, made of it a place conducive to thought and
reflections, and even Cranny Beaumont fell under its spell. And what
was more natural than that he should recall the time when, with three
hundred dollars in his pocket, he had left home henceforth to depend
upon himself.

Three hundred dollars! Why, at that time it had seemed like a fortune,
enough to go forth and conquer the world. Yet now--he didn’t like
to think of it--his finances were dwindling rapidly. The hiring of
“Starlight” and the purchasing of firearms had cut a pretty big hole in
his resources. Was he to go back to his father--a failure?

“No, never!” he murmured. He bit his lip almost savagely. “I must find
a way!”

And despite the lively conversation of his companions and the bantering
remarks which his continued silence brought from them, the Tacoma lad
continued to ponder over the important problem.

A few miles beyond the timber they began to see familiar objects.

“Not far now, fellows,” sang out Tom, at length. “The old ranch-house
is just beyond the next rise.”

“And after such a glorious ride, how glorious it will be to crawl under
a blanket and reflect upon the lovely things we have seen,” said Dave.

“I’d rather steer away from reflections,” declared Cranny, who was
beginning to recover his spirits. “I’ll race you to the top, Tom.”

The Ramblers promptly accepted this challenge, and the two, cracking
their quirts, started off. The distance, only a few hundred feet,
was quickly covered; “Starlight,” to Cranny’s extreme gratification,
leading by a head. But the first glance he took toward the ranch-house
stifled his shout of triumph and made him utter an exclamation of
surprise instead.

“Just look at that, Tom!” he gasped. “Did you ever see anythin’ to beat
it?”

Tom was staring in open-mouthed wonder.

The grim, square outlines of the ancient ranch-house made a dark
silhouette against the cloudless sky. All of its windows but two
appeared as dark, gloomy patches; and from these exceptions a dull glow
of yellowish light struggled forth.

Their castle had been invaded.




CHAPTER V

NEW FRIENDS


A chorus of exclamations arose when the others rode up.

“Great Scott!” exclaimed Dick. “Say! Maybe this isn’t some surprise.”

“Well, I like that,” cried Tom, fiercely.

“I don’t,” said Don, with decided frankness.

“We’ll just dash right down and see what it all means. Come on,
fellows.”

The impetuous Tom, quite as indignant as though the ranch-house were
his own private property, was about to act upon his own suggestion,
when Don hastily voiced an emphatic protest.

“Wait--hold on!” he cried.

Don had been thinking about Jim Raulings’ revelation regarding
the cattle rustlers. Was it safe, he demanded, to rush heedlessly
ahead, not knowing who might be there to confront them? Suppose, for
instance, they should belong to a band such as the Texas Rangers had
described--what then?

“Oh, pshaw!” scoffed Cranny, his eyes sparkling with interest. “It’s
no use to call for the police. I’ll bet there isn’t one due on this
beat for another moon. Besides we’re seven--all armed---- That for the
cattle rustlers!” He snapped his fingers.

“Let ’er rip!” cried Tom.

And then Don saw the others flash away from his side and go swinging
down the gentle incline. With a feeling of apprehension the lad slowly
followed.

The moonlight falling across the dusky figures of the horsemen who
had drawn rein before the windows produced a decidedly picturesque
effect. Long greenish shadows straggled over the grass, details merged
themselves together, though glinting lights on spurs and horses’
trappings occasionally shot forth from the half obscurity with singular
clearness.

“Hello there; inside the house!” yelled Tom.

Almost instantly the broad, yellow spaces of light behind the windows
were broken. Two figures flashed against it. Then the highly expectant
crowd heard the creaking of the heavy window-frame as it was slowly
raised.

“Hello! Who are you?” demanded a loud clear voice. The speaker leaning
far out of the window gazed upon them earnestly.

“The question is--who are you?” called back Tom. “That’s our house.”

“Ah, indeed! Then, in that case, you may come in.”

Don Stratton’s visions of cattle rustlers and desperados immediately
vanished. Surely the tones of that voice, a hearty, musical one, had
nothing in them suggestive of the characters he had so vividly pictured
in his mind.

Joining in the ripple of laughter which the man’s response had caused,
he, like the others, tied his pony to a hitching-post, and right behind
them bounded up the steps.

At the entrance the mysterious visitors looming up in the doorway faced
the crowd.

“Thunderation! What a big bunch it is!” cried one, evidently the
younger. “I say---- Great Cæsar, Professor! Am I right--nothing but a
lot of boys?”

“Boys!” echoed Tom, stiffly. “We’re----”

“All explanations inside, if you please,” interrupted the man who
had spoken to them from the window. “Parry,” he slapped his companion
good-naturedly on the shoulder, “in spite of all my traveling, I’m not
over the faculty of being surprised. Well, well--I am again!”

“And so were we,” remarked Tom, rather grimly.

They followed the men into the dining-room, where the rays from a
couple of lanterns resting on the table revealed their faces clearly.

The taller and elder of the two appeared to be a man of about
forty-five. And though his face was bronzed by exposure to the
elements, a dark, pointed beard and eye-glasses served to give him an
air quite in accord with the title of “professor.”

The most conspicuous features about the other, evidently but a few
years older than the lads, at whom he stared with a mingled look
of wonder and amusement, were a pair of clear blue eyes, and dark,
chestnut hair.

“Now, fire away, fellows!” he began easily.

“Yes, do! Really this is a most welcome surprise,” interjected the
other. Then, dropping his bantering tone for one of seriousness, he
added, “But do kindly assuage my feeling of overwhelming curiosity. How
does it happen that a crowd of boys----”

“Oh, yes; we know just what you’re going to ask,” Tom’s voice had a
weary note in it--“that kind of question has been often tossed to us
before. But I think, sir----”

“Quite right,” replied the man, smilingly. “Our explanations should
come first. Besides, we owe you an apology for so unceremoniously
entering your house.”

All this, spoken in a jovial tone, had the effect of prepossessing the
crowd in the visitors’ favor.

“My name is Horatio Kent,” he explained. “And I am a lecturer. Every
year I deliver a series of travelogues in the large Eastern cities,
which are illustrated by motion-pictures.”

“What a great job!” cried Cranny.

“It has its advantages. This is my assistant--an expert motion-picture
photographer.”

“Glad to meet you, I’m sure,” grinned Parry. “At present we are
traveling rather unconventionally on horseback, with a little burro to
help us carry our stuff. Passing this old ranch, about sundown, en
route to the town yonder,” he waved his hand toward the south, “and,
being rather weary, after a long day in the saddle, the idea struck us
that we might stop here for the night. The door wasn’t fastened, you
know. Our horses are back there in the stable.”

“You’re most welcome, I’m sure,” declared Bob, heartily.

“Thanks.”

“And say, maybe we weren’t surprised when all these evidences of
civilization struck our eyes,” laughed Parry. “Both the professor and
I thought somebody would be moseying along pretty soon, but we never
expected----”

“Of course you didn’t,” broke in Tom, a bit scornfully. “Nobody ever
does. The idea--a pack of kids out on the plains at this time of night;
why---- Sir”--he swung around to face the older man who had addressed
him--“shall I tell you who we are, and where we come from?”

“Yes, sir.”

“Sit down, fellows,” grinned Dave; “here’s where the history of the
Rambler Club is wound off once more.”

Dave was quite right. Tom’s lips lost their sarcastic droop as he
plunged ahead, and, for fully half an hour, his deep-toned voice held
almost undisputed sway. At the last, pleased with the exclamation of
surprise, and the brief comments which occasionally punctuated his
words, he drew from his breast pocket a well-bethumbed copy of “The
Kingswood High School Reflector.” “That’s published in our home town,”
he explained loftily. “There’s an account in it, too, of some of the
adventures of the club written by Dave Brandon, our historian.”

“Parry, how dreadful it would have been if we had missed all this!”
laughed the lecturer, glancing over the sheet, which Tom placed in his
hand. “Dear me, I’m glad I never lost the faculty of being surprised.”

“I’ll never get over this,” chuckled Parry. “You’ll have to put this
crowd into your next lecture, Professor. Now you chaps will get some
fame!”

“We’re pretty well known already,” remarked Tom, modestly.

Now the boys began to ask a few questions themselves, and the lecturer,
in the clear, resonant tones of one long accustomed to speak on the
public platform, obliged. Rapidly he told them something about the
various countries they had visited in quest of material for his work,
ending up with the explanation that this year he had decided to make an
exploration of Mexico, and on his way to that country study conditions
along the Texas border.

“I think some of our people in the East would like to have visualized
scenes and incidents connected with the work of the United States
soldiers who are patrolling this section,” he said. “I expect also to
get some pictures of a more stirring nature on the other side of the
Rio.”

“What!” cried Cranny, his eyes opening wide with astonishment, “the
scrappin’, you mean?”

“To be sure; why not? The lecturer and motion-picture photographer are
attended by risks of many sorts. Our comfortably-seated audiences,
while viewing pictures of lands taken in various quarters of the
globe, and of wild and ferocious animals prowling about their native
haunts, probably seldom realize the dangers and hardships which are
encountered by the men who have traveled thousands of miles to get
them.”

“They don’t indeed!” agreed George Parry.

“I shouldn’t care to tackle that job in Mexico,” commented Sam Randall,
reflectively.

“Nor I, either,” confirmed Don.

“Count me out of such adventurous proceedings, too,” said Dave.

“And I’m right in for ’em!” exclaimed Cranny, so emphatically that the
two men looked at him with a smile. “I say--are you goin’ across the
Rio pretty soon?”

“Very shortly,” replied the lecturer. He shifted his position on the
rough, wooden bench, and the glow from the lanterns falling across
his bronzed features with picturesque effect revealed a thoughtful
look in his eyes. “Judging from what has been told to us on the way,”
he continued slowly, “that little Mexican town over yonder and its
surroundings will be the theater of some exciting events before many
days have passed.”

“And if it does turn out that way, we ought to get some bully films,”
remarked the photographer.

There was no room in Cranny Beaumont’s mind just now for troublesome
thoughts of the future.

“I’m mighty glad these chaps happened along,” he reflected. “It’ll make
it easier for me to skip across into old Mexico; and, by Jove, maybe
I’ll go with ’em.”

The unusual meeting of the two parties at the old ranch-house proved to
be a most pleasant one for all concerned. They talked so many hours,
too, that by the time it was decided to turn in, the stout historian
sat dozing in a corner.

He complained energetically at being disturbed, but Tom and Dick
cruelly hustled him, sleepy-eyed and yawning, to his feet.

“We have to stable our ponies, you know,” Dick reminded him.

“And get up mighty early in the morning,” chimed in Tom. “We don’t want
to miss that trip with the Texas Rangers.”

“The Texas Rangers?” queried Professor Kent.

“Yes, sir,” answered Cranny. Then in a few words he explained about
their plans for the following day.

“I wonder if they’d object to our accompanying the expedition?” mused
the lecturer. “I declare, Parry”--he turned to his assistant--“it would
suit me capitally.”

“Yes, indeed,” said Parry.

“The Rangers will be glad to have you, I’m sure,” declared Bob,
confidently.

“Good. Anyway, a word in our favor from the Ramblers ought to have
great weight with them,” laughed the other.

Within another half hour the crowd had attended to their mustangs,
besides examining those of the visitors, which, together with a sturdy
little burro, they found very interesting. Then each took a hasty look
at the motion-picture cameras and other paraphernalia necessary to the
travelers’ profession.

“Oh, my! Don’t I wish I could lecture,” sighed Cranny. Disturbing
thoughts concerning that bothersome subject--his future--flashed into
his mind once more, but Tom’s loud, gruff remark: “Step along lively,
fellows! We ought to be hitting those balsam boughs--the Rangers, you
know!” drove them away on the instant.

“Don’t worry, Tom, we won’t miss ’em,” he gurgled.

On their way to the house the group stopped for a few moments to study
the calm and poetic aspect of nature. The far-off hills on the Mexican
shores rose faintly against a bluish-green sky unflecked with clouds,
while the tall grasses of the prairie, still waving and tossing under
the influence of a gusty breeze, were edged with delicate touches of
silvery light.

“Glorious!” pronounced Dave.

“And yet only a few miles away, perhaps amid just such another peaceful
scene, rival armies are encamped ready to hurl themselves upon each
other at the first opportunity,” remarked the professor, with a
thoughtful look.

Presently inside the ranch-house the crowd set to work, and taking a
portion of the fragrant balsam boughs from each bed made up two for the
travelers. This being accomplished, they promptly lay down and before
long were sound asleep, heedless alike to the beauty of the night or
the sound of rifle shots which for some time sounded faintly from afar.




CHAPTER VI

IN THE SADDLE


Next morning after breakfast the entire crowd was on the roof.

Tom Clifton, with Bob Somers’ field-glass pressed to his eyes, at last
uttered an exclamation which attracted general attention.

“See anythin’?” demanded Cranny.

“Yes. Hooray, fellows! There come the Rangers!” he answered.

“Maybe it’s only a bunch o’ cattle rustlers!” chirped Cranny. “Quick,
Tom; let me have a squint.”

Though the sun had risen some distance above the horizon, streamers of
grayish mist still hung low over the landscape, completely blotting
from view the hills beyond the Rio. But by the aid of the powerful
binoculars which penetrated this fast dissolving curtain, Cranny saw
the specks assume the definite form of horsemen.

“Correct, Tom, old chap,” he affirmed. “Hustle! We don’t want to keep
’em waitin’.”

“I scarcely think you will,” said the lecturer with a smile.

Nimbly the crowd piled through the trap-door. Down-stairs they buckled
on cartridge belts, adjusted revolvers, holsters, and lastly slung
glistening rifles over their shoulders, while Professor Kent and George
Parry looked on with twinkling eyes.

“Never in all my life did I see a peaceable bunch look more warlike!”
chuckled the latter. “Boys, if you ever cut across the river in that
rig, you’ll have the Mexicans surely thinking that the United States is
tired of ‘watchful waiting’ at last.”

“That’s all right,” laughed Cranny.

A few minutes later the party was in the stable. Then followed a lively
scene. The mustangs whirled and danced about, but all the activity on
their part failed to impress the little burro, which had to be prodded
and coaxed vigorously before he would consent to leave the mellow
shadows of the interior.

Quickly the boys sprang into the saddles, fastened their rifles across
the pommels, and in a due westerly direction galloped off, occasionally
uttering yells which no doubt easily carried against the slight breeze
to the ears of the approaching Rangers. In the crest of a gentle rise
they drew rein, to gaze long and earnestly over the prairie. But the
only other human beings in sight besides themselves were the lecturer
and his assistant, who, hampered by the obstinate burro, had been left
far to the rear.

“Give another whoop, fellows!” commanded Tom.

The others obeyed, and immediately following their lusty chorus came a
faint, answering hail.

“Ha, ha!” laughed Cranny. “We’ll soon be on the way.”

Before the other travelers had time to reach them, the four Rangers,
with Jack Stovall in the lead, came into view over a ridge.

“I was mighty certain ye’d never let us git by ye!” shouted the young
Ranger, the moment he had come within speaking distance. Then, glancing
toward the two men, urging the burro to a faster gait, he added with a
quizzical smile, “Say, pards! I reckon that’s some more o’ your gang,
eh?”

“You’ll know in a minute,” Cranny shouted back.

With the sunlight playing over them and horses’ trappings and spurs
catching and holding myriad gleams of light, the policemen of the
plains presented quite an impressive appearance.

Carl Alvin in charge of the detail warmly saluted the boys, and looked
inquiringly toward Professor Kent and the photographer, who were now
rapidly approaching.

Bob Somers quickly introduced the Easterners, and the Rangers, with the
exception of Jim Raulings, greeted them in hearty fashion.

“Sure, you can go along with us,” declared Alvin, after a moment’s
conversation. “We’ll be glad to have you.”

“Big Jim,” a zealous, conscientious officer, feared that the advent of
so many strangers among them might in some way interfere with their
duties. And at present they had a very important assignment, for
complaints of the activities of cattle rustlers as well as smugglers
were steadily coming in to headquarters.

“I wish them fellers would hike off somewheres else,” he confided in
a low tone to Chaney. The other, however, merely shrugged his broad
shoulders and grinned.

“Come ahead, men,” came in Carl Alvin’s clear voice.

The restive, mettlesome mustangs, glad to be on the move once more,
shot forward at the word of command, and breaking into a loping trot
presently carried the riders over another rise which shut from their
view the gray, adobe walls of the ancient ranch-house.

The weather was warmer than on the day before and lacked the fresh,
keen breeze to temper the heat. The sun shone from a cloudless sky
and as it climbed higher and higher all nature became enveloped in
a yellowish glare, which, with the clouds of dust kicked up by the
ponies’ heels, made the travelers long for a bit of woods and shade.

And this longing was soon gratified. Clumps of cottonwood began to
be encountered and beyond the horsemen could see a line of timber
stretching off in a northeasterly direction. This they knew marked the
course of one of the tributaries of the Rio Grande.

Even Cranny Beaumont uttered a sigh of satisfaction when the mustangs,
their shaggy brown-patched coats flecked with foam, finally threaded a
passageway leading into this thick brake, where grateful shade at last
shielded them from the sun’s hot rays.

“Ah, this is a jolly nice change!” he remarked, wiping his perspiring
face.

“I should say so,” murmured Don Stratton, still too much of a
tenderfoot to be enjoying the situation with as keen a relish as his
companions.

“We’ll give our nags a chance to rest at the first likely place, boys,”
announced Alvin.

To the lads it didn’t look as though any “likely place” could be found.
The cottonwoods, willows, prickly pears and mesquite were so densely
matted together that progress became slow and difficult. Occasionally
a streak of light trailed over the ground, touching up with a golden
luster vegetation which lay in its path.

Had the boys been alone it is doubtful if they could have found their
way through the depths of the lonely haunts at this particular point.
The Rangers, however, thoroughly familiar with the locality, led the
way in single file, following winding paths which only an experienced
eye could have detected. It was difficult work, for treacherous roots
trailed over the ground, and often low-hanging boughs, pushed aside
by riders in advance, snapping back into place smartly lashed those
following close behind.

“Well, this is some job, sure enough!” declared Cranny, after a
particularly violent impact.

“Never mind, lad,” Alvin called back. “We’ll have it easier in another
minute.”

“Thank goodness!” murmured Don.

Not many yards farther on the long file of horsemen entered a little
glade, pleasantly shaded.

“Hooray!” cried Cranny. “Isn’t this fine?”

“Great!” responded Dave. “I could stay here all day!”

The steady crashing of horses’ hoofs in the underbrush suddenly ceased,
and men and boys dismounted. After securing their mounts to convenient
saplings they sought the cool, greenish shadows, where each, with
expressions of satisfaction, immediately stretched himself out on the
ground.

The party quickly found, however, that they were not destined to remain
there long in peace. Hordes of mosquitoes swarmed down upon them; and
though a vigorous defense was offered to the vicious attacks, the
immense numbers of the little buzzing insects made such efforts almost
futile.

“Mercy, help!” murmured Don.

“Kill ’em and they come right back,” grumbled Dick; “eh, Tom?”

Tom, however, merely nodded. He expected discomforts out in the open
and when they came generally bore them with heroic fortitude.

“I say, Carl,” he exclaimed, “where is the ranch of this Colonel
Brookes Sylvester, who has been having trouble with the rustlers?”

[Illustration: “INTO THE SADDLE, BOYS!”]

“About fifty miles from the town,” replied the Ranger. “And it’s one
of the finest in southwestern Texas. The colonel, besides being a
cattleman, is a farmer, and has some of the best artesian wells in this
section.”

“He’s sure a fine man too,” put in Raulings, “an’ the last time I seen
him, he was all broke up. ‘I’m bankin’ on the Texas Rangers to help me
out,’ he says; an’----”

“Was he talking about the cattle rustlers?” queried Tom.

“No--somethin’ that worried him a heap sight more’n them critters,”
grunted the Ranger in reply.

Tom, whose curiosity had been greatly aroused, might have asked
some other questions but for the fact that Don jumped to his feet,
exclaiming in disgusted tones:

“Say, fellows, I can’t stand these torments a minute longer!” He looked
toward Alvin, who nodded.

“Into the saddle, boys!” said the Ranger.

Through openings here and there in the break they could see the river,
a narrow and muddy stream. In a straight line the distance was short,
but the route which the riders soon followed proved to be so winding
and irregular that a considerable time elapsed before they reached its
bank. In places the trees on either shore met to form a leafy archway,
which sparkled and glittered in the sunlight.

The gravel bottom of the stream enabled the mustangs and burro to wade
across.

Entering the brake at a point farther down-stream Carl Alvin led the
advance so skilfully that nowhere were they forced by barricades of
green to retrace their steps.

Probably no one among the party was more relieved to see the thicket
opening out than George Parry, who had charge of the burro. The clumsy,
intractable animal either halted with annoying frequency or managed to
get his stocky little form tangled up in the vegetation.

“That was certainly tough work!” he puffed as they rode out on higher
ground.

“I should say so,” laughed Cranny. His twinkling eyes sought Don’s.
“Fun, I call it.”

“Well, I’m generous enough to let you have all my share,” chuckled the
New Orleans lad.

The country through which the travelers rode during the next few hours
was of a diversified nature. Sometimes it was over sandy ridges
crowned with Yucca or mesquite, at others along rolling stretches of
country which extended for miles and miles.

Carl Alvin explained that near the Rio Grande the ground was mostly
very rough, with only a few irrigation farms along the river.

“I should think outlaws would have an easy time of it out here,”
remarked Don.

“Some years ago they did, an’ then there was plenty of ’em,” declared
Jack Stovall. “Believe me, the Texas Rangers have made western and
southern Texas a white man’s country. But naturally ye can’t expect us
to clear ’em all out.”

“Do you think you’ll round up this new bunch of rustlers?” asked Bob.

“Certainly, though in a vast country like this, it’s mighty hard to
watch the frontier; an’ there’s many a good hidin’ place along the
Rio--all that makes it hard.”

“Maybe the Ramblers will help us,” drawled Chaney with a broad grin.

“If our crowd had the authority, and stayed here long enough we might,”
laughed Tom.

A few miles farther on they came to a branch of the river recently
crossed, and entered another brake, almost as dense as the other. Half
an hour’s travel beyond this brought them in sight of a horse and
rider. On catching sight of the advancing party, the man cracked his
rawhide quirt and galloped forward.

“That’s Jim Roland,” announced Carl Alvin.

“Another Ranger?” asked Professor Kent.

“Yes, sir, and a good one.”

Jim Roland was of course astonished to see so many boys among the
horsemen, a fact which brought forth several humorous observations
from Tom. Finally, after having his curiosity partially satisfied, the
Ranger led the crowd toward a hut which nestled near the base of a low
hill. Almost hidden behind a grove of cottonwoods it seemed to be an
ideal situation for the quarters of the Ranger detachment.




CHAPTER VII

SCOUTING


They found the policeman in charge making out a report to the
adjutant-general at Austin.

He was a very tall Texan, a man over six feet in height,
correspondingly broad, and possessing a pair of stern-looking gray eyes
which matched well the stern, determined lines of his face.

The name of Fred Cole, the Texas Ranger, was known and respected all
over that section where his activities took him. Absolutely devoid of
fear, it was generally conceded that he had been the means of driving
more desperate characters from that part of Texas than any other single
member of the Ranger force.

Cole, however, was not in a very happy frame of mind these days.

After a long interval of comparative peace, the ranchmen were again
suffering at the hands of an outlaw band, the most troublesome which
that section west of the Nueches River had known for years. It was
apparently a well perfected organization, for stock had recently
disappeared in wholesale numbers.

It was naturally inferred that such work could not go on without
the assistance of some unscrupulous stockmen, and men were becoming
suspicious of one another.

Altogether it was a very bad state of affairs. There was talk of
organizing posses; there was even criticism of the Rangers, men who
every day of their lives were exposed to grave perils and hardships;
and many of whom could show scars, the result of encounters with just
the same sort of men that were now giving them so much concern.

Under the circumstances Fred Cole was not in a very good humor, but he
neither gave evidence of this, nor surprise when so many boys descended
upon his camp. He received them all in a pleasant offhand fashion, as
though such visits were a common every-day occurrence; then excusing
himself began to talk earnestly with Carl Alvin.

Four other Rangers, however, did not hesitate to express their
astonishment, and, as the hut was far too small to accommodate such a
large crowd, the lads and Professor Kent and his assistant accompanied
the men toward a long shed at the rear, in which a number of horses
were stabled. Just outside they paused.

Tom, to whom the rôle of spokesman now always seemed to fall, obliged
once more, giving some details of the history and adventures of the
“Rambler Club,” which the wondering Rangers listened to with great
attention.

“I sure never did hear the beat o’ it!” declared Bart Eagan, some time
later. “But say, pards, ain’t ye hungry after all that ride?”

“Famished!” murmured Dave.

The Rangers looked at his stout form and laughed.

“The fattest is always the hungriest,” remarked Joe Kane sagely.
“Boys,” he made a gesture over his shoulder, “a water-hole’s back
there, so ye kin wash up a bit.”

“Oh, joy!” sighed Don.

“We’ve had our grub a’ready but I reckon there’s a bite or two left for
each of ye.”

Ten minutes later the travelers, refreshed by a liberal use of the
clear, cool water, and with travel-stains removed, sat down before a
rough board table placed at one end of the shed. Every one of them,
too, partook of the food set before him with that keen appetite which
only those who have lived much out in the open seem to possess.

A little while after, Cole, in the company of Alvin, coming outside
“the office,” entered into the conversation. As a rule he was rather a
taciturn man, but the presence of so many bright, youthful faces caused
him to depart for the time being from his reserve.

“I’ve no doubt that the life of a Texas Ranger to you boys seems to
be a very romantic and enjoyable one,” he remarked with a grim smile.
“Though in reality it’s just plain hard work.”

“You’re right there, Fred,” grunted Raulings.

“And there is no doubt that the state of Texas owes you a great
deal,” said Dave. “I’ve read how the Rangers made it possible for
homesteaders and farmers to settle in parts of the state which before
were overrun with desperate characters. And the resources of the earth
being put into use, of course, means advancement and prosperity for any
section.”

“Quite true,” said Cole. “And we mean to make it a safer and better
place all the time.” He turned to Alvin. “Though to police efficiently
such a vast territory would require a very much larger force.” Then
seating himself on a bench near by, he, in answer to a question from
Dick, told him that another company of Rangers had their headquarters
at a town nearly three hundred miles to the north.

“Whew! What a jump between police stations,” chuckled Cranny.
“Why--that’s away above the big bend of the Rio!”

“It certainly is,” said Jim Roland.

“That there river ain’t much good for navigation,” volunteered
Raulings. “Ye see, for five hundred miles along its crooked course only
small steamers can use it.”

“All the same I reckon the stream’s been a mighty handy thing for
rustlers,” said Stovall. “I’ll bet many a drove o’ steers has been
shipped on to boats, taken down-stream an’ loaded on ships.”

“Sure thing,” agreed Jim.

“I’m a-goin’ to stick up for the Old Rio,” grinned Joe Kane; “it’s sure
all right for irrigation purposes anyway.”

“Yes, an’ the United States an’ the Greaser Government are always
a-scrappin’ over it,” growled Raulings. “But none o’ ye ain’t hit the
nail on the head yet.”

“Smash it,” pleaded Cranny.

“Without no fear of contradiction I can say that for helpin’ the
Chinese to git on our side of the border that there stream is a bird!
Yes, sir! There’s gangs what smuggle ’em over at so much a head. An’
the slant-eyed chinks is only too willin’ to pay.”

“Did you ever?” murmured Don.

“It’s true, boys,” came from Stovall. “We ain’t got enough customs
officers or other authorities to keep an eye on things; but let me tell
ye--it may be kind o’ easy for ’em a-gettin’ in; but when it comes to
stayin’ that ain’t the same.”

“How?” asked Dick.

“Well, ye see, the custom officials know every chink in the border
towns, an’ just as soon as a new face is spotted they get busy. If
the feller can’t give a straight account of himself an’ show proper
certificates, it’s good-bye to the States for that particular chap.”

“An’ maybe they ain’t a wily lot,” grunted Raulings. “Most of ’em know
enough to beat it for the interior to onct. They’ve ketched ’em many a
time in trains an’ on the brake beams o’ freight cars.”

“Yes, for a fact they have,” asserted another Ranger named Roy Cooper,
“an’, say--didn’t I even hear tell of a case where they nabbed a lot
who had smuggled themselves into barrels. The officers found ’em aboard
a freight wagon bound for the interior.”

“There’s always somethin’ doin’ in this old world,” said Cranny.

For another half hour the boys talked with the Rangers, then after that
began a tour of exploration around the immediate vicinity. To roam
about on foot proved to be such an interesting experience that it was
almost supper time before they returned hungry and tired to camp.

“I say,” remarked Cranny, as after a good meal he lolled indolently by
the side of the cheerful blaze, “too much of this life isn’t enough,
eh?”

“No,” admitted Don, “though I’d like it better if some of the
mosquitoes would nose into the next state.”

They turned in rather early, probably because the Rangers did, and were
up with the sun.

Immediately after breakfast George Parry set up his camera and took
several motion-pictures of the Rangers performing various duties.
He also filmed a detail of mounted men, and the Ramblers and Cranny
exhibiting some fancy tricks on horseback, “stunts” which had been
taught to them by the Wyoming cowboys, Cranny explained.

When the last picture had been taken and the detail in charge of Carl
Alvin was starting off, Parry called after them:

“I’ll label one of these, ‘Departure of the Texas Rangers and the
Rambler Club in search of cattle rustlers.’”

“I only hope we run across ’em,” yelled Cranny in reply. “If we do,
then some of us will see a moving picture in real life.”

That day the scouting party made a journey which embraced many miles
of territory. They met several cowboys and saw herds of cattle. That,
however, was the extent of their experiences. So far as could be
learned the bandits were keeping quiet; though none of the men, with
whom they talked, thought it would be for long.

On the succeeding days the boys again accompanied the scouts, and these
long, fatiguing rides over all sorts of country, with the sun’s hot
rays beating down upon them, gave every one a good insight into the
hardships and discomforts which the policemen of the plains were often
obliged to face.

This sort of life was making a remarkable change in the appearance of
Don Stratton. His face had now become fully as bronzed as that of any
Rambler, and a new strength and vigor seemed to have been imparted to
his frame.

On two occasions when night came upon them the party camped under
the star-studded heavens; and both times lay awake for over an hour,
listening to Dave Brandon as he talked entertainingly about the wonders
of the stars and constellations so many millions of miles away.

Returning to camp early one evening they found two things to interest
them. One was the arrival of Sergeant Robson Howell to take command of
the detachment; the other an announcement by Professor Kent that he and
George Parry intended to leave on the following morning for Mexico.

Hearing this Cranny Beaumont became strangely silent. For some time he
paid little attention to what was going on around him. Then suddenly he
looked up to blurt out:

“Fellows, I’m goin’ to Mexico, too!”

Tom stared hard at him.

“What!” he exclaimed.

“Yes, sir; it may be my only chance. Who wants to go along?”

There was silence--a dense silence for an instant. Then Tom spoke up.

“I,” was the sound that Cranny heard him utter.

“And I.”

“And I.”

These last two replies coming from Bob Somers and Dick Travers
increased the smile of joy which had begun to overspread the Tacoma
lad’s face.

“Hooray!” he shouted enthusiastically. “Won’t we just have a----”

“Oh--look here!” interposed Don hastily.

Those words started a discussion. It was a lively, earnest one, in
which Dave, Sam and Don spoke in the negative, while the others
upholding Cranny’s side of the case and incidentally their own, met
logic with logic, facts with facts, and so successfully, too, that Sam
at last threw up his hands as a token of surrender.

“Of course, I knew from the start it wasn’t any use to argue,” he
laughed, “but say, Bob, won’t you promise to come back in a day or two?”

“Sure thing,” said Bob.

A smaller sized argument thereupon ensued. Bob and Tom readily agreed,
the former even naming the day, but Cranny hedged.

“Honest to goodness, fellows,” he protested, “it’s most certain I’ll
come back, too, but----”

“Boys!” remarked Dave, solemnly, “we might as well get at some more
useful occupation.”

And this is how it happened that on the following morning the
detachment quarters of the Texas Rangers lost, for the time being, six
of its party of interesting visitors.




CHAPTER VIII

IN MEXICO


In the little settlement on the Rio Grande, situated at the terminus of
the short line of railroad, the five encountered a Mexican, who, for a
few coins, piloted them to a place along the river where the banks were
so shelving that for a great part of the way horses could wade across.

At a lonely, deserted spot the Americans set foot in Mexico--that land
of revolution and turmoil--a land that may truthfully boast of the most
wonderful resources, yet within the confines of which can be found the
greatest of poverty and misery.

After riding over a rough and rugged trail, nearly always in sight of a
range of distant snow-clad mountains, the men and boys, hot, dusty and
tired, reached the quaint little frontier town about four o’clock in
the afternoon.

The action of the United States Government in sending war-ships to Vera
Cruz and landing marines and soldiers at that port was of a too recent
occurrence for the hot-headed Mexicans to have forgotten their anger
and resentment. Therefore as the foam-flecked, steaming mustangs jogged
slowly along the main street an occasional cry of “Gringo” generally
uttered by some youthful voice rose above the sound of trampling hoofs.

Here and there picturesque little towers rose against the sky. Then
the characteristic Mexican balconies, over the railings of which many
a gaudily-colored rug was thrown; the pots of flowers in bloom; the
semi-tropical vegetation and the traces, still to be seen on many
sides, of the days when the Spaniards held control, all combined to
form scenes full of interest and color.

Every one seemed to be moving about the sun-baked streets with an air
of indolence. Men and youths were occasionally seen, sprawled out
in the bluish shadows, some with high conical hats pulled well down
over their eyes. The very atmosphere of the place suggested languor
and inaction; yet those well informed knew that behind this air of
tranquillity lay grave fears for the safety of the town. Encamped only
twenty miles away, the Constitutionalists’ line of steel might at any
moment advance and attack the Federal garrison.

As they rode slowly along Professor Kent spoke about these things to
the boys, causing a sparkle to replace the fatigued look in Cranny
Beaumont’s eye.

“Fellows, it’s just like living in a place near a sleepin’ volcano,” he
exclaimed.

“I am thinking of something else,” said Dave. “I’ll take some chile con
carne, frijoles, tortillas, and a whole lot of----”

“Have mercy,” pleaded George Parry, with a weary smile.

“I’m not going to have any on my pocket-book,” declared Dick.

The travelers were now turning into a big plaza. On one side the bell
tower of the cathedral rising dazzlingly white against the deep blue
sky was the dominating note of the scene. Flocks of pigeons fluttered
about the belfry or swarmed over the ground.

It was market day and plenty of the stands were still heaped up with
fruits and vegetables of many sorts. In their chairs, sheltered by
dingy awnings from the torrid rays of heat which made the plaza fairly
sizzle, fat old market women and men sat dozing. They awakened very
quickly, however, as the horsemen clattered along.

Their voices suddenly broke the silence; heads popped out of windows;
from various quarters people appeared to stare, apparently in great
astonishment, at this new American invasion.

Goats walked unconcernedly over piles of refuse. A little yellow cur
trotted past, showing its teeth and giving vent to a challenging growl.
Then from beneath the shadows of a line of mulberry trees a mounted
rurale galloped forth.

The riders pulled up to listen to a string of words which had less
meaning to them than the bark of the yellow dog. By means of some
extraordinary signs, however, Cranny managed to convey to the officer’s
brain an understanding of what they required. Then like a general at
the head of his troops, he conducted the party, now surrounded by a
curious gaping crowd, to a near-by hotel and restaurant.

A fat Mexican, evidently the proprietor, greeted them with an
ingratiating smile. In the proceedings which immediately followed, the
use of language on their part was fortunately not required. In a deep
bass voice he called a man from the stable in the rear, who took charge
of the mustangs; then he with many polite bows conducted the visitors
inside.

“What a relief it is to be in a cool retreat at last,” exclaimed
Professor Kent, mopping his perspiring brow.

“It’s worth all the discomforts we’ve gone through,” declared Dave.

The next hour was a busy one. After selecting rooms and stowing away
their belongings, they washed; then, having made themselves thoroughly
comfortable, gathered down-stairs in the shady patio or courtyard,
where a characteristically Mexican meal was served by the proprietor
himself--the most active man they had seen so far in town.

“By Jove! This grub is great stuff!” declared Cranny, enthusiastically.
“It may taste as though some one had accidentally spilled a package of
pepper in it, but it’s the kind that lingers in the memory.”

“A confoundedly hot sensation in my throat certainly has,” laughed
Parry.

“Boys, I’m mighty glad to be alive.”

“And we’re very glad you are,” said the professor smilingly. “You’ll
add much to the gayety of Mexico.”

“Fellows, now what are we going to do?” demanded Dick, pushing his
chair back in a very contented frame of mind.

“Take a nap,” suggested the lecturer.

“A nap!” echoed Tom, in horrified tones. “I should say not--I want to
see the town.”

“You’ll need a body-guard, so I’ll go along,” grinned Dick.

“Then another will be required for you,” said Bob.

“That means I’ll have to look after the whole bunch,” declared Cranny.
“Let’s beat it.”

Professor Kent and Parry, succumbing to drowsy feeling, nodded sleepily
when the lads a few moments later said good-bye and started off.

They found that the fierce heat had begun to wane and that mellow
softened lights replaced the unpleasant glare of the midday sun.
There were many more people on the streets, too. Many of the men wore
bright colored sashes and handkerchiefs about their waists and necks,
while the appearance of the dark-eyed women and girls was often greatly
enhanced by long, flowing shawls or flowers stuck in their hair.

“They look more Spanish than the Spanish,” chuckled Cranny.

“And I should judge by the way everybody stares at us that we look
awfully United States,” grinned Dick.

In leisurely fashion the crowd tramped along, often stopping to look in
store windows filled with all sorts of articles of Mexican workmanship.
Dainty little necklaces made of shells strung together, gold and silver
ornaments of exquisite design, and quaint and extraordinarily ugly clay
figures, the work of Indians, excited their admiration.

The proprietors of shops had no hesitation in rushing out and calling
attention to their goods.

“Well, fellows,” remarked Cranny, in rueful tones, “I’d like to buy
some trinket, but honest to goodness,” he shook his head, “I think
more of a nickel now than I used to of a dollar.”

“Hit upon any scheme yet?” asked Bob sympathetically.

“Yes, plenty of ’em.”

“Made any decision?”

“No I haven’t!” answered Cranny, almost fiercely. Then for fully five
minutes his brow remained clouded as disturbing thoughts ran through
his mind.

“There’s one word I’ll never forget, and that’s Gringo,” laughed Dick.
He glanced around with a cheerful grin, to survey a small group of
frankly hostile boys.

“Nor I,” said Bob, “but if we don’t run up against anything worse than
that, I’ll be satisfied.”

Following a number of twisting streets, they slowly retraced their
steps to the hotel where Professor Kent and his assistant were
anxiously awaiting their appearance.

“Thank goodness, you’ve come at last,” exclaimed the latter. “Hungry!
Why, boys--I’m getting almost as big an appetite as that stout
historian of yours.”

It didn’t take long for them to gather around a table in the patio,
this time full of a noisy, jabbering crowd. Then, after another spicy
and highly seasoned meal which was lingered over in the same leisurely
manner which characterized the Mexicans near by, they strolled out on
the veranda.

The moon from an unbroken expanse of greenish gray poured a flood of
light over gaily chattering throngs. In and out of the shadows cast
by the mulberry trees they ceaselessly marched, and among them were
laughing, dark-eyed señoritas and Federal soldiers whose uniforms added
touches of color to the scene.

It all made a very entrancing picture; for neither the moonlight nor
the brighter glare from the electric lamps was sufficiently strong to
reveal the crudeness on all sides so evident in the hot cruel glare of
the day.

And now over the languorous air, filled with the scene of flowers and
shrubs, came the soft strains of music, catchy, inspiring. Many a foot
beat time, and many a couple, light-hearted and laughing, danced near
the mulberry trees.

“Ah, this is simply great,” declared Cranny, with a sigh of pleasure,
“and yet----” he paused.

“Yes?” said Professor Kent interrogatively.

“One certainly wouldn’t think----”

“What?”

“That all this still makes me think of the dangers one runs when
staying near a sleeping volcano.”




CHAPTER IX

A LONE HORSEMAN


Early next afternoon a lone horseman rode slowly into the plaza. Both
the appearance of horse and rider gave evidence of a long hard journey.
The man’s sunburned face, shadowed by the broad brim of his sombrero,
looked lined and haggard; his clothes, too, were torn and dusty.

The animal’s shaggy body was steaming, while his slow, spiritless
movements and dejected mien showed plainly that food, water, and rest
were urgently needed.

“Hello!” exclaimed Tom, with the others standing on the veranda.
“What’s that?”

“Forsooth--if I mistake not a man--a horse,” laughed Cranny.

“And, by Jove, best of all, an American!” cried Bob Somers, who had
been gazing intently toward the approaching rider. One good look at the
man’s clean-cut features convinced the others that Bob was right. They
observed something else, too; he held the reins in his left hand; the
other was swathed in bandages.

“H’m; looks as though he’d been in some kind of muss,” commented Tom.

“So it does,” agreed Dick.

The rider as he came up, on discovering so many of his compatriots
facing him, appeared so surprised that for a moment he allowed their
cheery salutations to go unanswered.

“Well, well,” he began at last. “I didn’t----”

“Of course not,” said Tom, cheerfully. “Nobody ever does. But I
say”--he pointed to the young man’s arm--“is it----?”

“It is!” answered the other in grim tones. “Quite badly, too.” Slowly
he dismounted, shook a cloud of dust from his clothes, then patted the
mustang’s shaggy head.

“I’m mighty curious to know what a crowd like you is doing in this
out-of-the-way spot,” he continued, “but my desire for a bite to eat
and rest is, for the moment, so much greater that---- Hello, here he is
now!”

The fat proprietor had appeared on the scene, and it became apparent
to the boys that the men were well acquainted. The American switched
off into the Spanish language, speaking it with ease and fluency. When
the man came from the stable to lead his weary horse away, he stepped
up on the veranda.

The crowd, sympathizing with his tired condition, made no attempt to
question him, though Cranny found it difficult to check the flow of
words which were ready to gush forth at the slightest encouragement.

An hour and a half later, however, the aspect of the situation had
changed. The young man, having attended to his various needs, was just
as anxious to talk as they.

In a few words Tom told him something about the club. Then abruptly he
demanded, “How about your hand?”

“I’ll tell you,” said the young man. “My name is Ralph Edmunds and I am
a special correspondent for an Eastern newspaper syndicate.”

“Say, that’s a fine job,” said Cranny.

“You might not think so, if you’d been mixed up in some of the
scraps I have!” remarked Edmunds dryly. “It’s a dangerous game.”
The lines of his face became hard and stern. “I’ve been with the
Federal troops and just last night we ran across a scouting party of
Constitutionalists--whew--say--maybe it wasn’t some hot scrap. Rifles
crack easily in this country, you know! Well, a stray bullet scraped my
wrist. At first I thought it had ploughed clean through; but luckily it
didn’t do any more than temporarily put it out of commission,--which is
bad enough, and made me take a long wearisome ride back here.”

Expressions of sympathy came from the crowd.

“And--confound the luck, one of my most important articles is only half
finished--what am I to do?” To emphasize his disgust Edmunds’ well hand
came down on the table with a bang.

“First of all, let me take a look at your wrist,” said Tom in
professional tones. “I’m going to be a doctor some day, you know.”

“I do now, at any rate,” remarked the newspaper man. “And I’m glad to
hear it. You may save me the trouble of hunting up a Mexican medico.”

Tom always carried with him a small case containing all the necessary
articles for the first aid to the injured treatment, and being deeply
interested in the subject had received instructions from a physician
in his home town, Kingswood. He left the room to return a moment later
with the precious case tucked under his arm.

“Who bandaged it up for you?” demanded Tom, as he unwrapped the gauze.

“A good-natured Mexican.”

“Well, he may have been good-natured enough; but I reckon he never even
saw the book--here, let me show you!”

An admiring crowd watched the physician-to-be skilfully bathe and bind
an ugly wound; a proceeding which caused Cranny once more to become the
victim of disturbing thoughts.

Tom’s career was all settled upon. He had wisely made a selection
and with a definite purpose in view could look forward to the future
without fear or worry. Deep in the midst of gloomy reflections he
lifted his head, as these words spoken by the newspaper man reached his
ears.

“I say! Is there any chap in the crowd who’d like to help me finish my
article?”

On the spur of the moment Cranny answered:

“Sure thing! I’ll do it.”

“Well, isn’t this simply fine? Can you write fast?”

“So fast that when it’s done nobody can read it,” grinned Cranny.

“Never mind. I’ll risk it. When will you start?”

“Right away.”

Probably Cranny’s quick decision was caused by the strong liking he had
taken to the youthful newspaper man. He felt that he was one of those
“red-blooded” chaps, full of grit and determination.

The crowd was certainly astonished. It seemed most unlike Cranny to
proffer his services for any kind of work when he could just as easily
go off on a pleasure jaunt. So with puzzled expressions they watched
him and the correspondent presently leave the room.

“Remarkable,” whispered Dick.

“Being with us is doing Cranny lots of good,” said Tom.

“It isn’t making him any worse, at least,” said Bob, with a smile.

Two hours later the Tacoma lad reappeared, carrying a manuscript.

“I sailed through it like a breeze, fellows,” he chuckled gleefully.
“A whole two cent lead pencil’s gone. I’m off to despatch it to the
newspaper syndicate. Comin’ along? Good.”

The post and telegraph office was in the same building as the general
store. Situated in the liveliest section of the frontier town, with
a spacious porch surrounding the entire structure, it had become a
convenient lounging place for a considerable number of the idle poor.

“It was like running a gauntlet,” Dick declared, to pass before the
dark glittering eyes of the Mexicans.

While Cranny attended to his mission the others waited outside. The
view they saw was characteristic of border towns. Saddled horses were
hitched to posts at intervals along the sidewalks. A buckboard and
other vehicles, some of the most primitive sort, formed a little group
near by. On both sides of the wide, tree-shaded streets were hotels or
stores of various sorts, but the most conspicuous building, both on
account of its design and the flaming posters which adorned its front,
was a moving picture theater.

When Cranny rejoined them with a peculiar look of satisfaction on his
face, they wandered across the street to study the place at closer
range.

“H’m, looks kind of good to me,” remarked Tom. “Let’s take it in
to-night.”

“Do just let’s,” chortled Dick.

“Good idea,” approved Cranny.

“The ayes have it, so we’ll go,” declared Bob.

Arriving at the hotel they found Professor Kent and Edmunds engaged
in conversation, and a few words which the lads overheard before the
others were aware of their presence made Cranny Beaumont’s face light
up with pleasure.

“Yes, sir! He’s a smart one; writes from dictation like a streak, and
scarcely ever makes a error.”

“Bully for you, Cranny,” said Bob softly.

After taking their evening meal in the cool patio, and writing letters
home, the crowd set out for the motion-picture theater.




CHAPTER X

MOVING PICTURES


Although the performance had already started the four managed to find
seats on the front row.

The audience was a noisy, talkative one. A constant jabbering of
tongues sounded on all sides; laughter rang out at frequent intervals,
and the pianist, sitting opposite the boys, had difficulty in making
the melodious notes of his instrument heard.

One of the first things the Americans noticed was the excellence of his
playing. With fascinated attention they watched his deft fingers moving
over the keyboard, even while the first part of a three reel thriller
was flashing on the big white screen above.

“Some music that!” declared Cranny. “It’s better’n the canned variety.”

“Simply great,” said Dick.

When the lights flashed up during an interval all three lads uttered
exclamations of surprise.

“Great Scott! another American,” exclaimed Tom, in a voice which he
intended to be low, though his words easily carried to the pianist’s
ears. The latter looked toward them earnestly. He was an extremely
good-looking young chap--only a lad, and he seemed to be entirely out
of place amid such surroundings.

“Hello!” he greeted them with a smile. “Yes, another American!”

In an instant they were chatting with delightful informality, unheeding
either the stares or the gruff remarks of several Mexicans near at hand.

“My name is Jimmy Raymond,” the pianist informed them. “What’s yours?”

Tom supplied the information.

“A club,” began Jimmy. “Why, I never----”

“Of course not,” said Tom graciously. “We’ve heard that before. Now for
goodness’ sake tell us what you are doing here?”

“Playing the piano.”

“Oh, please don’t joke---- Say, boys, we’ll have to tell the Texas
Rangers about this meeting.”

A peculiar change came over Jimmy’s face at these words, though
the tones of his voice remained the same as he said: “The Texas
Rangers--what do you mean?”

The observant Tom, ever ready to scent a mystery, began to wonder if
they hadn’t come across one here. It seemed to him very strange indeed
that a boy of Jimmy’s refined appearance should be making his living in
a little Mexican motion-picture theater. But before he had a chance to
say any more the lights faded, and the second reel of the tragedy was
flashing on the screen.

Tom lost all his interest in the pictures. His detective instincts were
aroused, and by the time the interior was aglow with light for the last
time that night he had managed to convince himself that it was his duty
to learn as much as possible about Jimmy Raymond.

When the lad stood up Tom Clifton made a discovery that sent a little
jarring note through him. He could see even when the pianist had been
seated that he was tall, but that he should actually be as tall as
himself was never dreamed of. Tom even felt a little aggrieved. So
long accustomed to looking down upon his fellows he had almost come to
regard it as a right not to be infringed upon.

“I guess you two chaps are the highest humans of your age in Mexico,”
gurgled Cranny. “Come on, Raymond, we want to have a conversation with
you.”

When compatriots meet in a foreign land the ties of country, the common
tongue, are often the means of forming warm friendships in a remarkably
brief space of time. Such was the case of Jimmy Raymond and the others.
And they quickly found that the lad had a lively tongue, but apparently
a strong disinclination to talk about himself.

“Really, fellows,” he told them, as they walked out on the street
together, “I haven’t much to tell you. I’m from Texas. You see,” he
hesitated, “I got confoundedly hard up in this town, and, as an awful
lot of good money was spent on my musical education, I hit upon the
melody business as a way to keep me alive.”

“You play like a bird; you touch the heart-strings,” chirped Dick.

“Thanks, old chap. Whatever ability I have has proven a mighty good
thing for me. I believe every one ought to learn something so he can
turn it to account in case of necessity.”

“There it goes again,” grumbled Cranny to himself. Then the old joyous
light came back into his eyes, and he chuckled without any apparent
reason. “You’re mighty right, Jimmy,” he said aloud.

If Jimmy was not prodigal in dispensing information about himself, he
proved decidedly inquisitive regarding the lives and adventures of
each of his companions. A continual flow of questions was constantly
receiving answers. Jimmy seemed profoundly happy, though at times a
curious expression flitted over his face, half sad, half discontented,
as if life to his mind was not altogether what it should be.

Of course the atmosphere of mystery which, to Tom at least, surrounded
the Texas lad, made him all the more interesting to the Rambler, and
having found one who listened to his tales of the club with unconcealed
delight he was eloquent on the subject of life in the open. His
descriptions of cowboy life in Wyoming especially pleased the lad.

“Crickets! What a dandy time you must have had,” he exclaimed, a
wistful note in his voice. “But come along to my room. You’ve no idea,
fellows, what a relief it is to hear English spoken.”

“Then why are you staying in Mexico?” asked Tom bluntly.

Jimmy eyed him for a second, with a most curious expression: then,
shrugging his shoulders, he replied, “I’ve got a job.”

The hotel at which he had put up was situated not far from the plaza.
In the moonlight, with its grim old adobe walls partly shadowed by
towering cottonwoods, and artistic balconies to relieve the grimness
of square, severe outlines, it bore almost an inviting aspect. A dim,
yellowish glimmer shone from the open door, and from somewhere inside
came the musical, twanging notes of a guitar.

“What a comic-opera country it seems,” grinned Dick.

“Except at times, I suppose,” said Cranny.

To the intense astonishment of the proprietor, Jimmy led the crowd up
a flight of stairs to a large room, facing the street.

“Here’s where I hang out, fellows,” he said, lighting a lamp.

The boys looked about them with interest. Several prints, mostly
American, decorated the walls. The furnishings were dingy, and almost
every article of furniture had suffered some sort of injury during the
course of its apparently long existence. Certainly it was not at all
the place which seemed suited to the requirements of a lad like Jimmy.

“Sit down, fellows, and make yourselves miserable,” he laughed. “Oh, by
the way, Tom”--he walked to a table in the middle of the room--“here’s
a cracker-jack book on cowboy life--want it?”

“Sure thing,” answered Tom, accepting the proffered volume. He looked
approvingly at the picture of a wonderfully rearing bronco on the
cover; such a horse as he had never seen in nature, or ever expected
to. “I reckon this tale’s got the punch all right,” he exclaimed,
slipping the book into his pocket. “Say, Jimmy, how long are you going
to stay on this side of the Rio?”

“Until I get tired of it, Tom.”

“But don’t you know that livin’ here is ’most as bad as bein’ in a
house stored full of dynamite bombs, an’ havin’ a careless chap in
charge?” asked Cranny.

“I guess I’m no more afraid than you.”

“Good boy! You’ll do.”

It was getting late, but no one paid any attention to this, until the
solemn notes of a distant bell, ringing out the hours of midnight,
warned them of the passage of time.

“We are now being introduced to another day,” remarked Bob.

“And we’ll be introduced to a mighty sleepy feeling in the morning
unless we hit the trail for the plaza,” chirped Dick.

Even then it was hard to tear themselves away, and, when at last they
did so, Jimmy’s face lost some of its cheerful expression.

“I’ll see you some time again to-morrow,” he said in eager
tones--“so-long!”

A moment later the four were out on the street. The town seemed wrapped
in slumber. Their footsteps echoed noisily; voices in the dreamy
silence rose startlingly clear.

“Jimmy Raymond’s a mighty fine chap,” began Tom. “But say, boys--don’t
you think----”

“Of course,” interrupted Cranny, with a laugh.

“What?”

“A mighty mysterious one, as well.”




CHAPTER XI

SOLDIERS


In the meanwhile Dave, Sam and Don, who had elected to remain with the
Rangers, were learning many new things about Texan life.

A breezy day, white clouds skimming over an expanse of the purest
blue, a vast rolling country stretching off and off until it cut in
faint, grayish tones against the sky, and in the midst of this several
horsemen, was the picture which Dave Brandon contemplated from the top
of a gentle rise. It was as refreshing to his artistic nature as the
ozone to his lungs.

But he could not linger long, as the horsemen were already drawing
far away; so cracking his quirt, he cantered down through the thick
grasses, while a pleasant, cooling breeze swept past, toying playfully
in its passage with stray locks of hair.

With Sergeant Robson Howell leading the detail, the Rangers,
accompanied by Dave, Sam and Don, had been riding since early morning.
And now they were approaching the site of a new town, situated not
far from the famous “Eagle Pass” Ranch of Colonel Brookes Sylvester.
Crowning the summit of a gentle elevation, the center of a fifty
thousand acre tract of land which was rapidly being disposed of to
home-seekers, they saw the beginning of what might some day become a
large and flourishing city.

“The birth of a new town!” remarked Dave quite solemnly.

“And when Colonel Sylvester backs anything, it’s sure to be a success,”
exclaimed Sergeant Howell who was riding close by. “Come here five
years from now and I’ll wager you’ll be surprised. Sylvester, when the
new line of railroad reaches it, is going to take on a boom, which will
be heard throughout the state!”

“I believe it,” said Dave.

On all sides were evidences to show that the workers, full of the
same enthusiasm that had inspired the early pioneers, would make the
Ranger’s prediction come true. Land was being cleared, artesian wells
bored, irrigation ditches dug and houses built.

“Yes, sir,” said a man with whom they stopped to talk, “I reckon that
within another year thousands of acres will be under cultivation.
Nowadays when a town is started it’s started right. Town planning
commissions look ahead. They plan so that future generations may be
left a heritage which should inspire them to still greater efforts.”

“I don’t believe Sylvester will ever have any narrow, twisting streets
like those we see in some of the border towns,” said Sam.

“No, sir, it certainly won’t.”

“This is a good illustration of the way in which the old-time
ranchman is being driven farther and farther away,” remarked Dave.
“The railroads pushing their way into his territory; the consequent
springing up of towns along the route, and the army of home-seekers
taking over the tillable lands have made wonderful changes within
recent years.”

“Quite right, son,” agreed the man. “But it means only that two things
are being done now instead of one.”

“And the ranchers and the live-stock companies are now conducting their
business on more scientific principles,” explained Sergeant Howell.
“Efficiency and economy are words much in use to-day. Pasture lands are
well taken care of and cattle and sheep shipped to market in the best
possible condition.”

“Sure, it’s all fine and dandy,” grinned Jim Roland. “But if the time
ever comes when they git scientific Rangers I’ll quit the force.”

“I say, Sergeant,” a man mounted on a little sorrel pony came jogging
up. “Ketched any o’ them there rustlers yit?”

“No,” answered the officer.

“Too bad! I heard the colonel was all-fired mad; says if his stock is
raided ag’in, he’ll git up a posse, sure.”

Talking of posses always annoyed the veteran policeman, for it implied
an inability on the Rangers’ part to enforce law and order. His deeply
bronzed face became suddenly stern.

“We don’t need any help on the job,” he growled in reply. “If you run
across the colonel tell him from me that the Texas Rangers will soon
clean up this bunch!”

“I certainly hope you do, Sergeant; otherwise it may keep a whole lot
of people away from this town.”

“Sylvester could do better without that kind of citizen,” retorted the
officer. “Come ahead, boys.”

After riding around the town-site for a short time, occasionally
halting either to watch the various operations or to talk with some of
the busy workers, the scouting party headed toward the “Rio Grande.”
For miles the horses pounded over an undulating country dotted with
thick clumps of timber. And on this grassy range they came across great
herds of cattle, the property of Colonel Sylvester.

One moment their forms glistened in the bright clear sunlight, the next
were softened by the shadows of the swiftly flying clouds.

The two Ramblers had often ridden in the midst of great herds of
longhorns on the Wyoming plains, but this experience was an entirely
new one to Don Stratton. He found it hard to repress an uneasy
feeling. Hundreds of cattle lifted up their heads to gaze inquiringly
toward them. Some began to paw the ground belligerently; from various
directions came hoarse bellowings. Everywhere, along their course,
animals were sent scampering away, and these little currents, setting
others into motion, made Don fully realize what a fearful, irresistible
force these cattle would make in a wild stampede across the plains.

Several times he stood up in his stirrups to look earnestly over the
backs of the vast army of animals that completely hemmed them in.

“Well, if they ever got started, we’d be in a fine pickle, that’s
all,” he murmured, studying with critical attention a gigantic steer,
which defiantly forced his mustang to make a detour around him. As his
stirrup leathers brushed against the animal’s side he gave a muffled
snort of anger, and for an instant stood with lowered head as though
about to charge.

Nothing more than an unpleasant jar to Don Stratton’s nerves resulted,
however. This part of the journey seemed to drag out interminably, and
as they finally rode out of the main herd, to see only scattered groups
between them and the vast open range beyond, he felt like shouting with
relief.

“I don’t wonder rustlers manage to get away with stock now and then,”
he said to Sam, some time later. “So far we haven’t seen a single
cowboy.”

“It probably isn’t as easy as it looks,” replied Sam. “Cow-punchers, no
doubt, very quickly discover when any of the stock is missing, and in
these days of telegraph and telephone, it doesn’t take long to notify
the authorities.”

“Then again, cattle can be driven only at a certain rate of speed,” put
in Dave, who had overheard. “There is always a chance, too, that the
animals may leave a trail, which expert plainsmen can easily pick up.”

A few miles farther on the rolling, verdured prairie began to be
replaced by a rougher country. Yucca, mesquite and cactus grew in
greater profusion, and here their mustangs were often obliged to thread
a tortuous passage at the bottom of dark, narrow ravines or climb steep
slopes, where the great spiked stems of the cactus seemed to bristle
threateningly at their approach. The ponies’ hoofs, dislodging stones
and earth at almost every step, sent miniature avalanches slipping and
sliding down to the bottom.

This progress was slow but steady; therefore none of the lads was
surprised when on reaching the crest of a high ridge they saw not far
beyond the yellow, sluggish water of the Rio Grande, winding its way
through a broad grassy valley.

“That’s certainly a fine sight,” commented Dave. Through half-closed
eyes he looked at the sun, a glittering ball, slowly approaching the
irregular contours of the Mexican hills. The sky was full of gorgeous
color, which, sending a glow over the succession of barren ridges
rolling off to the distance, transformed them into objects of delicate
and poetic beauty.

“Say ‘glorious,’ Dave, do,” said Sam with a smile.

“That word seems scarcely strong enough to suit the present case,”
laughed the other.

“Really, fellows, I’m almost too tired to notice anything,” remarked
Don frankly.

“For a tenderfoot, you’re a wonder, Don,” said Carl Alvin. “Eh, Jack?”

“Yes, sir, an’ that there word doesn’t seem strong enough to suit his
case either,” grinned Stovall.

Don, his perspiring face streaked with dust, smiled his acknowledgments.
He really was a mighty tired lad, and shooting pains and various aches
began to run through his frame with decided force. Ten minutes later,
however, these discomforts were partially forgotten, for around a bend
of the river they suddenly came in sight of a great number of white
tents pitched in regular rows amid a grassy, bowl-shaped valley.

“Hello!” he exclaimed.

“An encampment of United States soldiers guarding the border!”
explained Joe Kane.

“Mighty interesting,” commented Dave.

“I should say so,” said Sam. “It also seems to remind us of the fact
that the relations between our country and its sister Republic across
the Rio may become a bit more strained at any moment. Whoa, boy! whoa!”

Boys and Rangers halted, while Sam drew his field-glass from its case.

“Those are the lads that’ll keep the Mexicans on the side they belong,”
remarked Roy Cooper.

“But for them they might have been a-swarmin’ across the river like
flies,” growled Raulings.

“Don’t forget we’re on the job too,” grinned Chaney.

Sam Randall raised the glass to his eyes. What a marvelous change the
powerful instrument wrought. Details as clear and distinct as though
the camp were right before them flashed before his eyes. Several big
commissary wagons with rounded tops, resembling prairie schooners, all
drawn by four-mule teams, stood motionless in a row.

Nearer the foreground a rude structure open at the sides, built
of boxes and poles, with a thatched roof of branches and twigs,
was evidently the kitchen, for a stove and other accessories of
the culinary department reposed in the center. On the outside, a
miscellaneous collection of boxes, sacks, and tarpaulin-covered goods
was scattered all about.

To the left, a group of soldiers busily unloaded the nearest wagon,
while close to the shore of the river a long line of horses grazed in a
patch of grass.

“I declare, I almost expect to hear a sentry challenge me!” cried Sam.

“Do let me have a look,” pleaded Don.

After another moment spent in studying the form of a shaggy dog, which
having discovered their presence was barking vigorously, the Rambler
handed over the glass.

“Ah, jolly fine!” exclaimed Don. “There’s a chap who tipped me a
wink--honest it looked so, anyway. Guess he wants us to pay ’em a
visit.”

“Nothing doing,” said the sergeant. “This is about the nearest we’ll
get to the boys in khaki.”

The binocular was passed from hand to hand until all had had a turn,
then the column set into motion again.

A few miles farther on, when all nature but a few streamers of cloud
hanging low over the western horizon was enveloped in pearly grays, the
horsemen drew rein in an amphitheater formed by low, rugged hills.

Portions of the valley floor were overrun with dense thickets, and on
the gray, rocky ridges above were groups of cactus and other plants.

“A jolly nice place to spend the night,” exclaimed Don.

“Fine!” agreed Sam.

“Yes,” drawled Dave as he dismounted and stretched his weary limbs.
“And I do hope that it will be a quiet and restful one.”




CHAPTER XII

RIFLE SHOTS


With all the skill and celerity which long experience had given them,
the Rangers began their preparations for the long hours before them.
The boys, too, got busy. Immediately after attending to the wants
of their mustangs, the three, using the leather buckets they always
carried, brought water from the river. Then fuel was gathered and a
fire started.

It was Dave Brandon’s turn to cook for his companions. Though very
often slow in his movements, the stout, round-faced historian always
managed to cast aside this tendency when anything called for action.
Now at work among the pots and pans he stepped about with a lightness
and agility which scarcely seemed compatible with his avoirdupois.

“You’re a wonder, Dave,” declared Don.

“Thanks,” laughed the Rambler. “I hope you’ll think my flapjacks are.”

“What! did I hear aright?” cried Don. “Flapjacks!”

“Yes, sir.”

“Oh, joy!” gurgled Sam.

“And do make at least two or three pailfuls,” pleaded Don.

The fire crackling noisily sent columns of bluish smoke rising high
above the hills. As the shadows deepened and stars began to twinkle in
the sky, the dancing light crept farther and farther out until objects
in a vast circle were lifted from the surrounding gloom.

Dave with his frying-pan was the object of universal attention. The lad
had learned the art of making flapjacks from the Wyoming cowboys. With
a skill almost equal to theirs he cooked panful after panful, while
enthusiastic comments were continually heard. Carl Alvin, acting for
the Rangers, joined in.

“I’ll give you fair warning, boys,” he grinned. “We’re going to be
flapjack rustlers to-night; eh, Chaney?”

“Believe me, that’s true,” responded the Ranger.

Men and boys certainly had a great meal that night; at least, every one
said so; and furthermore all agreed, too, that the finest dinner in
the finest restaurant on earth could never have tasted any better.

When all the dishes were cleared away, they lolled about on blankets
or marched to and fro, the flickering firelight casting fantastic
lights and shadows over figures and surroundings. An incessant chant
and hum of insects accompanied the never ending rustlings and sighings
of leaves and grasses, while occasionally louder sounds told them that
some wild creature was scurrying through the underbrush.

When the moon rose above the eastern hills, paling by its majesty the
stars and constellations, Dave Brandon rose to his feet.

“Boys,” he announced, “I’m going to take a stroll.”

“Goodness, what a surprise,” said Don. “Why, you’re generally the first
to turn in.”

“I know, but the effects to-night are symphonies in color, too
beautiful to miss. Who’s coming along?”

Both lads promptly accepted his invitation.

“I’ll wait up for you,” chuckled Carl Alvin. “I’m standing the first
watch.”

The three presently skirted the base of a hill, soon coming out on a
broad flat stretch bordering the famous river.

Five minutes later it seemed as though they were absolutely alone in a
vast solitude, for neither firelight nor sound betrayed the presence of
the Texas Rangers.

“Grand, indeed, is nature,” commented Dave. “Just look at the poetic
lights and shadows playing over yonder hills. Doesn’t it look
wonderfully peaceful? How can there be any trouble in such a world?”

“Ask the Mexicans,” grinned Dick.

“They are authorities on the subject of trouble,” said Sam. “Large
chunks of it come their way every day.”

In order to obtain better views of the surroundings the lads at times
climbed the steep, rugged hills, on the heights of which they nearly
always paused to rest, and the historian continually discovering some
new beauty in the landscape let the others share his pleasure.

Finally the walking became more difficult, the hills much higher.
Panting with exertion they struggled to the top of one, immediately to
seat themselves by the side of a mass of cactus.

“I guess this is far enough, boys,” panted Dave. His eyes wandered over
the forms on the slopes, which in the moonlight suggested miniature
gorges or beetling cliffs. Then, lastly, he looked with sleepy eyes at
the earth’s satellite, showing with wonderful brilliancy from a field
of greenish blue. Directly beneath, its shimmering reflection appeared
in the water of the Rio. And then--everything faded from the stout
historian’s sight; reality no longer confronted him, the vague fancies
of the dreamer taking its place.

Aroused by a touch on his arm, he sat bolt upright.

“Gracious!” he exclaimed. He had expected to see the moon in a certain
position in the heavens, and instead of that discovered it to be in
altogether another. “How long----?”

“Is it possible you didn’t hear, Dave?” queried Sam in earnest tones.

“Hear what?”

No reply was necessary.

Ominous and startling, a fusillade of rifle shots, coming from the
Mexican border, rang out on the still night air.




CHAPTER XIII

THE STORM BREAKS


The boys in the little Mexican town, on the day following their meeting
with Jimmy Raymond, “the boy pianist,” as Tom called him, began to see
trouble. The air of peace and tranquillity was partly gone. Soldiers
in great numbers, both mounted and afoot, swarmed through the narrow
twisting streets. Slouchy-looking citizens deserted for the time being
pleasant lounging places, to assist in the work of placing sand-bags
and beams on the roofs of some of the higher buildings.

Walking to the outskirts of the city in the company of Professor Kent,
George Parry, and the special correspondent, the boys watched sappers
at work digging additional trenches, while to the left of these more
breastworks were being thrown up.

“It’s just like living over a powder magazine, with somebody goin’ to
touch off the fuse, only one doesn’t know just when,” declared Cranny.

“That’s the delightful part of it,” commented Dick. “Expectancy in a
case like this is all the pleasure.”

“Speaking seriously, boys, I think you had better cross the
International bridge to-day,” put in the professor. “The United States
Consul has advised all Americans to leave the town.”

“I agree with you,” declared Bob. “There is no use in our taking
unnecessary risks.”

“Very sensible, indeed,” said George Parry, nodding his head
approvingly. “Our business, however, keeps us here. A moving picture of
a real, red-hot Mexican scrap ought to prove a winner.”

“How about you, Mr. Edmunds?” demanded Cranny.

A gloomy expression came over the special correspondent’s face. He
shrugged his shoulders. “I’ll stay, of course,” he replied. “Ah! What
wouldn’t I give just now for a perfectly good hand! Why--this is just
the kind of stuff I get paid to write about.”

“Wasn’t my work satisfactory?” asked Cranny, almost aggressively.

“Satisfactory? Well, I should say so; son, you’re a bird.”

“Then that settles it.”

“Settles what?”

“I’m goin’ to stay here too.”

Tom Clifton, who had taken no part in this conversation, was the
only one among the group who uttered any word of approval at this
announcement, which Cranny Beaumont made with all the energy of his
positive nature.

“No one has anything on you for grit, Cranny,” he said, admiringly.

All the others, however, shook their heads. They pointed out the
dangers, the consequences that might result if the Tacoma lad stuck to
his resolution, and none was more earnest in his arguments than Ralph
Edmunds. Cranny listened to all with a peculiar smile--the Ramblers
knew that smile,--it meant defeat for them from the start.

“Mr. Edmunds is goin’ to supply the words an’ I’ll push the pencil,” he
declared emphatically. “I’m gettin’ ’em cheap now--by the dozen.”

The newspaper man slapped him on the shoulder. “You don’t know how much
I appreciate your offer, Cranny,” he exclaimed. “But won’t you----”

“No, I won’t,” laughed Cranny.

Several times during the day the discussion was renewed, without,
however, altering in the least the lad’s decision.

As hour after hour passed without the expected attack materializing,
the town resumed its normal aspect, and those of its inhabitants whose
systems seemed to require a great deal of sleep went back to that
pleasant occupation in the most shady places they could find.

“You chaps can see now what a good thing it was we didn’t make an awful
rush for the International bridge,” commented Cranny, as they sat out
on the veranda that night. “I’m beginnin’ to weaken on that sleepin’
volcano stuff.”

“I guess it was all a false alarm,” remarked Dick.

“One never can tell what may happen in Mexico, though,” remarked
Edmunds, meditatively.

At last the day on which Bob Somers had promised Dave and the others to
return rolled around.

Cranny balked again.

“Yes, Bob; I know you made an iron-clad agreement to slip away from
Mexico,” he said, “but just recollect, old chap, I didn’t.”

“Actually going to stay here longer?” queried Dick in surprise.

“Bet your life, son. I’ve just bought another dozen pencils--got ’em
cheaper yet.”

Of course there was another argument--a long and earnest one. The
peculiar smile once more on Cranny’s face warned them of the futility
of their efforts; but duty, they considered, required them to plead.

“No, gentlemen, very sorry, I’m sure,” grinned Cranny. “But you see
Edmunds has a whole lot o’ articles half finished. I can’t desert him
now--I just simply can’t.”

“Mighty good of you, I’m sure, Cranny,” declared Bob, heartily. “And
now having used up all my stock of ‘buts’ and ‘ifs’ I’ll quit.”

“Bother the thing,” growled Tom. “I wish to thunder we hadn’t made any
promise.”

On this occasion Cranny’s decision did not so disturb his
companions’ peace of mind, for now it seemed almost certain that the
Constitutionalists had definitely decided to let such a well-defended
town alone. Still, Bob Somers could not reconcile himself to the
thought of allowing the Tacoma lad to remain there by himself.

“I have a solution to the question, fellows,” he announced.

“Oh, do let it solute at once,” cried Tom.

“I was really the only one to promise Dave to skip back, and the way
things have turned out you three chaps are justified in staying.”

“And let you go all the way back alone; no, sir!” declared Dick,
emphatically.

“I have another suggestion,” spoke up Tom. “Let one stay here with
Cranny, the other ride off with Bob. We can settle it by drawing lots.”

This compromise was instantly agreed upon and carried out. It proved to
be an interesting moment--quite a breathless one, in fact, when each
held in his hand the slip of paper that was to decide his fate.

Eagerly they were scanned.

“Ah,” murmured Dick.

“Ready, Tom?” said Bob. “It’s time to saddle up.”

The tall Rambler nodded.

“Don’t forget to keep an eye on Jimmy Raymond, fellows!” he counseled.

“Goin’ to do some detective work, Tom?” Cranny inquired with twinkling
eyes.

“Maybe,” answered Tom in mysterious tones.

Fifteen minutes later the stableman led out their mustangs. Then while
all the Americans and the still smiling hotel proprietor gathered about
them, the boys sprang into the saddle.

“We’ll be back in a day or two to get you, Cranny!” sang out Bob.
“So-long.”

“So-long,” shouted Tom.

Then followed by a storm of “good-byes” the Ramblers galloped off.

It was market day once more, and the heat of the day not having set in,
the plaza presented a lively, bustling scene. No one ever seemed to buy
without doing an immense amount of bargaining beforehand, and on every
side loud vociferous arguments arose.

“It takes lots of work to sell stuff here,” laughed Tom. “Hey there!
look out!” he altered his course just in time to avoid striking a pair
of wandering goats. “Wasn’t that a narrow shave!”

At a good pace the two clattered through the town, slowing up when the
outskirts were reached.

“There’s no great hurry, Tom,” declared Bob. “We ought to reach the
Rangers’ quarters without much trouble shortly after sunset.”

“Sure thing,” agreed Tom. “And we want to save our nags as much as
possible.”

The day was a sultry one, with but little air stirring. Often Bob
Somers raised his head to study the sky.

“I shouldn’t wonder if a storm is brewing,” he said finally. “I predict
we’re in for a good soaking.”

“Let it come!” exclaimed Tom, recklessly. “That’s a heap better than
falling in with a lot of Mexican Revolutionists.”

“I’m not bothering about them,” rejoined Bob, with a smile, “not enough
at least to make me wish we had crossed the Rio on the International
bridge. Guess this trip will be adventureless enough to suit even Dave.”

“Say, Bob,” exclaimed Tom, suddenly, “isn’t it a wonderful thing about
Cranny? I never heard of his wanting to work before; have you?”

“Truthfulness compels me to answer in the negative,” chuckled Bob.

“And what’s even stranger, he seems to do the work just right. Ever
hear of anything like that before, eh?”

“A second time, no, Tom.”

“Anyway, it’s a mighty encouraging sign.”

Then Tom suddenly switched off to another subject.

“I noticed a very odd thing about Jimmy Raymond,” he declared. “Every
time I happened to mention the Texas Rangers he looked awfully queer.
Honest he did, Bob. I’ll just bet he isn’t staying in Mexico for
nothing!”

“I hope everything is all right with Jimmy,” declared Bob. “He’s too
jolly nice a chap to be in any serious scrape.”

“That’s so, Bob, but the Rangers are going to hear all about him from
me.”

Owing to the hard traveling the two relapsed into silence. The ponies
climbed slowly over a series of rounded hills, and in single file
pushed their way through deep ravines choked up with vegetation.

The heat and sultriness seemed to be increasing, though the strata of
cloud on the horizon, so faint as to be scarcely discernible, remained
practically stationary.

“Oh, for a nice breath of air,” said Tom at last. He looked at the
steaming mustangs compassionately. “Honest, it seems to be harder on
these poor beasts than it is on us.”

At the same point where they had reached the boundary of Mexico, they
crossed the Rio Grande and entered the United States.

After taking a good rest under the pleasant shade of a grove of
cottonwoods the two headed in a northwesterly direction, riding over a
rugged, barren country.

On one of the hills they halted to look back in the direction of the
little border settlement situated at the terminus of the railroad.
It was hidden from view, however, by intervening ridges, though its
presence could be easily detected by faint clouds of smoke hovering
above it.

“That’s the last sign of civilization for a few days, Tom,” remarked
Bob.

Once more they jogged along in silence, taking many a glance at the
threatening-looking sky.

Slowly the character of the country began to change. When Bob Somers
at last reined up in the middle of a grass covered valley and realized
that, from this point on, most of the traveling would be over an
undulating plain, he exclaimed with a great sigh of contentment: “By
George! This is a welcome change, eh, Tom?”

“Well, rather,” replied the other.

Dismounting, the lads staked their ponies; then each, after taking a
long drink of tepid water from his canvas water-bottle, sought the
nearest patch of tall grass, into which he threw himself at full length.

A strange brooding silence hovered over the scene. Even the chanting of
the insects was silenced.

The storm approached much more slowly than either had anticipated,
though clouds of a palish white were now piling up in magnificent
rounded forms, the modeling of which suggested all the delicacy of
sculptured marble. Through a broad flat tone of murky gray at the base
coppery gleams of electric flame were flashing in zigzag streaks.

“And to think there’s no umbrella shop near at hand,” chirped Tom.
“Yes, we’re in for it, sure! Ready, Bob?”

The ponies, already showing signs of nervousness, snorted when the boys
sprang astride their backs. By this time the faint, almost continuous
booming of thunder, constantly growing louder, told the travelers that
their respite from the wrath of the elements would be only of short
duration.

At length, as the clouds approached nearer, the majesty of the scene
impelled the lads to halt. A breath of air was stirring the leaves and
grasses, a few wisps of clouds--the advance guard,--were flying swiftly
overhead.

“Look!” cried Tom, in awesome tones.

Vast, yellowish columns of dust in the midst of which branches and
boughs whirled in circling flights were advancing with great rapidity,
shadowing the whole earth beneath. Rain-drops pattered down.

“Don’t be scared, old chap,” Tom patted his prancing pony’s neck. A
forked tongue of lightning, at that instant striking the prairie, had
illumined the landscape with a weird, unnatural bluish glare.

When the crashing thunder came the rain was falling steadily, and the
cooling drops, beating and splashing down, proved most grateful to both
riders and steeds.

The next moment the wind was making them bend far over on their horses’
necks to escape its blasts. The piled up masses of clouds were now
sweeping across the zenith, and the yellowish glow over nature became
replaced by tones of a lowering gray.

“Here it comes!” yelled Bob. “Look out, Tom!”

Beyond, everything was shut from view by an advancing curtain of
driving rain. As it swept on, accompanied by a gale of shrieking wind,
ponies and boys braced themselves to withstand the shock. They were now
in the midst of the full fury of the storm. Every instant bluish forks,
darting forth like serpents’ tongues, criss-crossed against the clouds
or struck the prairie. Peals of thunder crashed and reverberated in a
series of appalling shocks which soon rendered the frightened ponies
almost unmanageable.

Bob Somers could see his companion ahead only as a shadowy, indistinct
form, sawing hard on the bit to keep his frightened horse from bolting.

He too had trouble. Now and again he spoke in soothing tones to his
mustang, though the sound of his voice was almost drowned by the dull
even thudding of the rain and the blasts of wind.

A gleam of lightning, flashing through the darkness with startling
brilliancy, caused his thoughts abruptly to change. Bob uttered an
exclamation. He had seen the bolt strike the prairie just beyond. The
force of the thunder which immediately followed made him fairly gasp
and his pony to plunge wildly ahead. But before the reverberations had
ceased Bob Somers made an alarming discovery. Unmindful of plunging
horse and beating rain he managed to stand up in his stirrups and yell
desperately with all the power at his command:

“Look out, Tom! Look out!”

Sweeping down upon them from the rear was a herd of stampeded mustangs,
and they were perilously close at hand.




CHAPTER XIV

THE STAMPEDE


The sight drove all thoughts of the raging storm from Bob Somers’ mind.
Directly in the path of the headlong rush of fear-stricken animals they
were in imminent danger of being run down and trampled under foot.

Again and again he yelled his warning. Would Tom realize his danger
in time? Then self-preservation demanded that he himself act on the
instant.

No longer did he hold “Whirly-gig” in check. His quirt came down with
stinging force upon the animal’s flank. With a loud snort he leaped
ahead.

Bob Somers, striving to cut across the front of that line of racing,
plunging horses, urged him on with both voice and spurs. It was a wild
and thrilling ride in the raging storm. The lad was forced to take
desperate chances; for any instant he realized that his horse might
stumble in the springy, water-soaked soil.

[Illustration: ONCE MORE HE TURNED]

Daring to swing partly around in his saddle he saw a picture which
made his brow knit in lines of desperation. And even when he turned
away, his brain still seemed to retain a terrifying impression of
outstretched necks, of flying hoofs, of wildly tossing manes and tails.

“Get up, old boy! Get up!” he yelled hoarsely.

Even in those nerve-racking moments he strove to discover some signs of
Tom Clifton. But his efforts were all in vain.

Terror made “Whirly-gig” pound along at such a terrific pace that it
required all of the Rambler’s skill as a rider to keep from being
jolted headlong from the saddle.

Once more he turned. An instantaneous glance over his shoulder made him
utter a yell of triumph; the race was almost won, he was gaining. It
nerved him to renewed exertions. Another last desperate spurt and the
little mustang carried him to the goal of safety and beyond; while the
wild, frightened steeds of the plains swept on, heads lowered, manes
and tails still lashing, until the steadily falling curtain of rain
first dimmed their forms, and then hid them from view.

With feelings of thankfulness, Bob Somers pulled up his steaming horse.
Then forebodings on Tom’s account attacked him. Where was he? How had
he fared?

The rain drove hard against his staring eyes, the wind howled about
him; but for the moment he had thoughts only for his companion. The
Rambler he knew was a plucky, resourceful chap, cool in times of
danger, but the possibility of an accident under the circumstances was
so great that a cold tremor ran through him.

“Hello, Tom! hello!” he shouted over and over again. The sounds melted
away into the roar of the storm, but no answering hails were returned.

Tom Clifton had completely disappeared.

Buffeted about by the elements, continually jarred by the peals of
thunder booming overhead, and soaked to the skin, Bob Somers set out
on a search. The next hour to the lad was a most uncomfortable one,
both physically and mentally. He rode over the prairie in various
directions shouting and whistling, but in vain. The storm slowly
lessened its force; at last the heaviest clouds rolled by and between
the rifts rays of brilliant sunshine streamed through to fall upon
nature, glistening and refreshed. A cool crisp breeze had replaced the
sirocco-like heat of the earlier hours.

From the top of a ridge which commanded a considerable stretch of
the surrounding country, Bob’s gaze, aided by a pair of powerful
binoculars, traveled in every direction. But he could see nothing that
bore any resemblance to the form of a horse and rider.

One thing, however, encouraged him. He felt sure that if Tom had been
thrown he would have come across him in his careful, painstaking search.

“Well, this is certainly a beautiful mix-up,” he soliloquized ruefully.
“Now what’s to be done?”

“Only one thing,” he mused after many moments of serious reflection.
“Strike off for the Rangers’ camp--that’s what Tom has done, I’m sure.”

Still he could not bear to tear himself away from the locality until
another effort was made and this proving to be as unsuccessful as the
others, he set out for the Rangers’ cabin, buoyed up with the hope that
on his arrival he might find Tom Clifton there.

Possessing a good sense of direction and aided by his compass, he did
not find his task a difficult one. When the gray of dusk had begun
to steal over the landscape he rode up to the log structure where
only Fred Cole greeted him, all the others being off on the scouting
expedition.

The return of Bob Somers alone greatly excited the Ranger’s curiosity.
Even before the Rambler had had a chance to dismount he began shouting
questions to him.

Bob’s story was quickly told, whereupon Cole whistled softly.

“To get caught among a lot of stampeding mustangs isn’t any joke, I
can tell you!” he exclaimed. Then, slapping the lad reassuringly on
the shoulder, he added hastily, “But don’t worry, son. I’ll bet that
tall chap knew how to take care of himself. Just as likely as not he’s
riding over the prairie, yelling himself hoarse, looking for you.”

The Ranger’s confidence, however, began to be shaken, when the passing
hours brought no news of Tom, though he was careful not to voice his
fears to Bob.

“The moment the boys get back, we’ll have to get up a searching party,”
he muttered to himself. “I only hope it’s all right, but”--he shook his
head rather dubiously,--“it looks rather bad to me.”




CHAPTER XV

THE FIGHT


In the silence of the night the reports of the rifle shots sounded
extraordinarily near. To Dave, Sam and Don it seemed as though the
firing was right at hand; yet there could be no doubt that the faint,
dusky figures, which the moonlight disclosed on the other side of the
Rio, were responsible for it.

“Great Scott!” cried Don, his voice vibrating with excitement. “That
must be a hot scrap--can you make anything out, Dave?”

The historian, who had a field-glass raised to his eyes, silently
handed over the instrument, while Sam, peering fixedly, exclaimed:
“Well--that’s bringing their troubles pretty close to the United States
border; eh, fellows!”

The New Orleans boy found that a great deal could be made out by means
of the binocular. A hot fight was on between two forces of considerable
size. Through the circle of pale greenish light he could see riders
dashing frantically about, and soldiers unhorsed running for cover.
Altogether, the scene was one of the greatest noise, violence and
confusion.

“Who in thunder ever expected us to run across anything like that?” he
breathed.

“Doesn’t surprise me in the least,” remarked Sam, calmly. “Let’s have a
look, Don.”

Then while he turned the glass on the combatants, the three remained
silent for a considerable time as they watched with the greatest
interest the struggle on the opposite shore.

“By George!” blurted out Sam, suddenly; he let his hands drop and swung
around to face his companions. “As I live they’re going to----”

“What?” fairly shouted Don.

“Wait a second!” Sam was once more studying the situation through the
glass. “Yes, sir!--some of those soldiers are actually going to cross
the river.”

Don Stratton in his eagerness, forgetting politeness, seized the
instrument from the other’s extended hand. In another instant he
saw the indistinct figures in the distance become quite strong and
clear. One side, evidently disastrously defeated and now in full
flight, had already reached the shelving banks of the river, where in
a panic-stricken effort to escape from their hotly pursuing foes they
were boldly riding out into the stream.

“I wonder what the Texas Rangers will think of that!” shouted Don.
“Hadn’t we better----”

“You may be sure that by this time they all know about it,” put in Dave
quietly.

“Probably there’ll be something doing soon, eh?”

“It looks that way.”

“What shall we do?”

“Let’s go down by the river and see the Rangers riding past,” cried Sam.

Following this suggestion the three dashed recklessly down the slope,
their eyes often turning toward the Mexican soldiers heading for the
United States shore.

The victors drawn up on the bank sent a parting volley of shots after
them, then slowly withdrew toward a near-by range of low, rounded
hills.

So far there were no indications of the Rangers’ presence in the
locality, but the lads felt sure that the hurrying Mexicans were soon
destined to meet with an unpleasant surprise.

“Those chaps are making mighty fast time, though,” panted Dick.

“They’ll soon be making faster time back,” predicted Sam, grimly.

Reaching a broad level stretch, the boys made for the river, a
proceeding not at all to the liking of Don Stratton, who began to fear
that the hot-headed Mexicans might mistake them for Rangers and fire.

He mentioned his thoughts to Sam. The Rambler, however, shook his head.

“I don’t believe we’re in a bit of danger, Don,” he responded in
reassuring tones. “You may be sure they won’t be anxious to start any
scrap on United States soil. Hello--hear anything?”

“By George! The Texas Rangers at last!” cried Don.

A faint steady pounding of horses’ hoofs to the south had reached his
ears.

Eagerly the three wheeled about to scan the border of the river.

“Hooray, hooray,” cried Don. “Here they come, full tilt, too. See ’em,
fellows?”

A number of faint dark specks were rapidly growing larger. But Dave
Brandon expressed the thoughts of all when he exclaimed: “They’ll never
get here in time to prevent the Mexicans from landing.”

The singular drama of the night unrolled before their eyes held a
peculiar fascination for the lads. Hastening along intent upon seeing
the last act they looked alternately from one body of horsemen to the
other.

Already the soldiers were close enough for them to see the moonlight
glinting on spurs and rifles. Judging from the appearance of the horses
the exertion of swimming and wading over sand-bars must have told
heavily on their strength, for in spite of fierce commands and cracking
quirts, they lumbered along so slowly that Don excitedly remarked:
“Those chaps won’t beat the Rangers out by very much, after all!”

“Suppose we climb that hill over yonder,” puffed Sam. “From the top
we’ll be able to see in which direction they head.”

“All right,” panted Dave.

Before they had time to reach its base, the dripping horses struggled
across the last strip of muddy beach and disappeared behind a jutting
point.

The Rangers’ horses, fresh and strong after a good rest, were
thundering along at topmost speed. Just as the boys, breathing hard
from their arduous work, scrambled to the summit of the ridge, they
clattered by.

From their point of vantage the three immediately caught sight of
the fleeing soldiers, a number of whom were scattering in various
directions.

“Sergeant Howell’s bunch will never be able to round them up now!”
predicted Don. “Ah! They go--see how those nags of theirs can travel!
Say, this beats a motion-picture thriller, doesn’t it?”

Interested and excited, the group watched the Rangers rapidly
overhauling the main body. Both pursued and pursuers, riding over the
crests of hills and down into deeply shadowed valleys, were often lost
to view. The sound of the pounding hoofs became steadily fainter, and
finally there was nothing to tell, either by sight or sound, of the
wild race taking place among the Texas hills.

“I wonder if the Mexicans will put up a scrap!” remarked Don in a
disturbed tone.

“I’m afraid so!” said the historian soberly.

“My! Wouldn’t I like to see what is going on now. It’s tough to have to
stay here in suspense.”

The boys made no attempt to conceal their worried state of mind. Every
one had come to like the big-hearted courageous Rangers immensely, and
the thought that they might be made the target for Mexican bullets was
a profoundly disturbing one.

The minutes dragged slowly by. Suddenly the sharp report of a rifle
shot ringing out came as a jarring shock to their nerves. Then a
second, quickly followed by a perfect fusillade, made the boys look at
one another with paling faces.

“The scrap’s started!” cried Sam.

“Isn’t it dreadful!” exclaimed Don. “I’m so afraid----”

He paused suddenly, for a singular fact had been impressed upon his
mind. He was once more hearing the sound of running horses. What could
it mean? Had the fugitives reversed the rôles?

“I don’t understand it a bit!” he breathed.

“Nor I,” cried Sam.

“All I know is that they seem to be coming back this way and mighty
fast,” put in Dave.

Puzzled as well as alarmed, the three watched and waited, expecting to
hear just what shortly did happen--another crackling volley of shots.

Dave Brandon, with the field-glasses raised to his eyes, suddenly
uttered an exclamation.

He had seen a flying group of horsemen appear over the top of a
mesquite-covered hill to form, for an instant, an indistinct collection
of silhouettes against the sky. Following these came still others
until an astonishing number of riders were rushing over the ridge and
disappearing into the valley below.

“It’s certainly a much bigger crowd than ever passed along this way,”
responded Dave in answer to his companions’ eager questions.

“What a mysterious affair it is,” murmured Don.

Although none of the horsemen could now be seen, their course could be
easily traced by an occasional yell or the report of a rifle.

“By George! They’re heading for the Rio, all right!” cried Don.
“Hello----”

A number had abruptly ridden into view from behind a ridge and were now
racing toward the stream.

“The Mexican soldiers again!” declared Dave, keenly studying the
distant figures through his glass. “Yes, sir! It’s back to Mexico for
that particular crowd.”

“Rounded up, after all!” said Don. “My, I do wonder if----”

“Don’t let’s think about it,” pleaded Sam. His frowning brow and firm
set lips told of unpleasant reflections running through his mind. Then
abruptly he added, “Fellows, I can’t stand this inaction a moment
longer. Let’s beat it!”

“Yes, come ahead!” cried Dave.

Just for a moment they watched the column of dusky figures progressing
farther out into the river; and thus being buffeted about from shore to
shore the lads could not help but feel a certain sympathy for them.

With Dave Brandon in the lead they crashed down the incline, slipping
and sliding, scattering rocks and stones in their passage. Then once
more at the base all started pell-mell toward the river. Their view to
the north remained cut off by intervening ridges, until the bank of the
Rio was reached. From that point they could see far ahead another group
of riders--a sight which put hope into their hearts.

“Quick, Dave! Hoist that magnifier to your optics!” pleaded Don.

There was a moment’s tense silence as the historian obeyed, and a shout
when he exclaimed, with an audible sigh of relief: “Boys, it looks all
right to me--but----”

“What?” demanded Sam.

“I can’t understand what has become of all those other riders we saw.”

“We’ll soon know all about it,” said Don, cheerfully.

The boys’ rapid walking and the Rangers’ steady pace brought the two
parties together much sooner than the former had anticipated.

“Hello, there!” yelled Don. “Is everybody all right?”

His question brought back a response in Jack Stovall’s clear voice
which made all three give a lusty yell of joy.

“Sure! They never touched us!”

Then, in answer to a rapid volley of questions, the young Ranger added:
“So ye actually saw all that big bunch, eh? Who were they----? Why,
United States soldiers of course--a scoutin’ party. They heard the
Mexicans firin’ from away up the river an’ beat it this way for all
they were worth. Lucky for us, too.”

“Yes, but for that a whole lot of the men might have given us the
slip,” remarked Alvin. “Between the two of us, we soon had ’em swinging
along on the back track. The soldiers did most of the firing--shot over
their brown heads, too, which was a pretty polite response, considering
the fact that the Mexicans started the scrap.”

“One of the Texas Rangers’ jobs is to see that undesirable citizens
o’ Mexico can’t cross over the border whenever they git a notion into
their heads they’d like to!” put in Jack Stovall. “So to-day, boys,
we’ve earned our pay.”

“True enough,” laughed Sergeant Howell. He turned toward the
historian. “How’s that, Dave--where did the soldiers get to? Oh, the
bunch started right off in the other direction.”

“Yes, they know’d well enough the Mexicans had enough of the American
side for to-night,” grinned Jim Roland. “They was in such a rush to git
back they never even stopped to leave their visitin’ cards.”

“I do hope there wasn’t any ‘watchfully waiting’ crowd all ready to
tackle the poor chaps the moment they reached the other side,” remarked
Sam, thoughtfully.

“As we haven’t heard any fireworks, I guess it’s all right,” said Don.

All the way back to camp, every member of the party kept a sharp
lookout, but not a sign of life was to be seen on the Mexican shore.

That night the boys slept as soundly as they ever had in their lives.
On the day following the thunder-storm an early start was made for
detachment quarters. Riding at an easy gait they did not arrive until
the afternoon. Then both Rangers and boys learned something which
filled them with considerable alarm. Tom Clifton was missing, and
though Bob Somers and Ranger Cole had been continually searching for
him, not a trace of the Rambler could be found.




CHAPTER XVI

A WILD RACE


Tom Clifton, ever watchful, had discovered the stampeded mustangs just
an instant before Bob Somers shouted his warning. Nearer the center
of the onrushing steeds, however, the lad instantly realized that if
he chose the direction in which Bob had gone, he would be overtaken,
perhaps knocked from his saddle and trampled under foot.

It was a moment when quick thought and equally quick action were
absolutely necessary. One glance at the panic-stricken beasts bearing
down upon him, like the blasts of the gale, decided his course.

Tom’s quirt cracked like a revolver shot, he gave a yell of command,
and the pony leaped ahead as though hurled through the air by the force
of powerful springs.

Then began a mad race. Following the same plan as Bob Somers, Tom tried
to cut across the front of the herd, riding in the opposite direction.
This plan he soon discovered would result in failure.

“The only thing I can do is to try and keep ahead of ’em,” he muttered,
grimly.

With all the means at his command he urged the mustang on until it was
impossible for the little beast to make any greater efforts.

And all this time the rain poured down in torrents; vivid flashes of
lightning illumined the darkened landscape with an unnatural glare, and
thunder rolled and crashed.

Frightened as any of the stampeded animals thundering along at his
heels, Tom’s mustang was making valiant efforts to carry himself and
his rider to safety. The Rambler, however, was becoming conscious of an
alarming fact--the long journey in the heat together with the headlong
pace was gradually sapping the pony’s strength. How much further, he
asked himself, could he travel, before becoming exhausted and dropping
in his tracks?

The dull, steady din of the many hoofs striking the soggy ground was
plainly audible to his ears even amid the roar of the storm.

“Great Scott!” cried Tom. “That’s what I was afraid of!”

The gap of safety which lay between him and the herd was surely closing
up. The animals were near enough now for him to see the whites of their
eyes, their distended nostrils, the clouds of steam rising from their
bodies in spite of the rain.

The sight of that dark mass, a veritable wall of shaggy bodies, made
the scowling lines in his forehead deepen. The Rambler resolved on a
desperate course.

He knew that cow-punchers, in efforts to stem the rush of stampeding
cattle and mill the herd--that is to swing it around on its own
axis--often fire revolver shots over their heads.

“It’s a mighty risky thing to try!” he breathed. “But all the same here
goes.”

Like a cowboy he was able to ride without the use of his hands. Drawing
his revolver from its holster he pressed his knees hard against the
mustang’s sides and swung about. A vivid flash from the clouds directly
above made the barrel a line of gleaming light. Then the muzzle began
to spurt forth flame and smoke. Until every chamber was emptied Tom
Clifton fired.

He heard frightened snorts; he saw the advancing wall of bodies
slacken for a second, and also several of the horses attempt to change
their course, only to be forced back into place by those rushing
behind--the attempt had failed.

“Now it’s all up to the nag!” he groaned. “I can do no more!”

A spotted pony, so close that his extended hand could have touched
him, nosed his way to the front and slowly drew ahead. Its eyes were
expressive of a terror which at that moment would have impelled the
animal to dash headlong to its own destruction.

Tom felt his knee jammed against a mustang’s side--another had
overtaken him. Yes, the gap had at last closed up--he was surrounded on
every side by that living wall. And whatever dangers might lie ahead
were concealed by the gray sheets of driving rain.

“Old boy!” he exclaimed, almost calmly, “if you stumble now it’s
good-night.”

Over the rolling prairie floor at scarcely slackening speed dashed the
herd. Tom found himself being forced nearer and nearer the center. His
pony, sometimes almost lifted off his feet, fought desperately. He
probably knew as well as his rider that a fall would mean the snuffing
out of his life in a twinkling by the flying hoofs.

The Rambler had lost all idea of direction, or how far they had gone.
The excitement of the previous moments now gave place to a dull calm,
which quieted the rapid beating of his heart. His thoughts were mostly
centered on one thing--should his horse stumble he must be prepared to
fling himself boldly upon the back of the pony nearest at hand.

Wedged in tightly, he watched and waited for the critical moment, while
mile after mile swept by. Great patches of underbrush, and tall grasses
over which the wild horses ran were torn to pieces and flattened as
though devastated by a cyclone.

As time passed and nothing happened, Tom felt his hopes returning. No
animals, he reflected, could keep up that mad pace much longer. Already
there was plenty of evidence to show that the animals were tiring. Some
seemed to be straggling out on the sides. The frowning lines on his
forehead lessened. The still howling storm again began to occupy a much
larger place in his thoughts.

Then he saw looming up just ahead a rather steep hill. Over this his
almost exhausted pony must climb. When the slope had been reached,
the pace was checked. Up, up, they staggered. Mustangs floundered and
stumbled in the soft, slippery earth. It was hard work, his pony seemed
ready to drop. Was the moment at hand when he must succumb?

Tom Clifton sat tense, alert, ready to act. He even picked out the wild
mustang, the back of which should feel his weight in case the necessity
arose.

But now he could see the top of the ridge rising right before him.

“Go it, old chap! Go it,” he encouraged him, desperately. “You’ll make
it yet! Steady, boy, steady! Ah, good for you!”

The horse had staggered over the top. The pace once more increased.
Tom’s fears, however, were not renewed for he discovered that they had
worked their way considerably nearer to one side of the herd.

“If the little fellow can only keep on his feet a few minutes longer,
we’ll be free of this bunch,” he reflected joyously. “Hello----”

A dense mass of tangled underbrush on the sloping side directly below
him formed a barrier which forced the horses to scatter on either side.

And then, by the irony of fate, just when safety lay in his grasp, his
pony’s hoof caught in a projecting root, and as though struck by a
bullet he dropped to the ground.




CHAPTER XVII

A NIGHT IN THE OPEN


Only Tom Clifton’s presence of mind saved him from taking a headlong
plunge down the slope. He had just managed to slide nimbly over the
mustang’s neck when a veritable pile of horses stumbled over his
steed’s prostrate body. With a quick spring the lad reached that point
of safety--the underbrush.

Yes, he was actually safe at last. All the mustangs but his own had
scrambled up, and on all sides, singly and in groups, were racing down
the slopes, growing fainter every moment.

He hadn’t realized how hard it was raining. The water seemed to be
coming down in sheets, thudding, beating and splashing; forming into
little rivulets, which wound in twisting passageways to the base of the
hill. The thunder was still rolling too, and every few instants the
glare of lightning rent the darkness and revealed what lay behind the
rain.

“Poor little duffer!” exclaimed Tom, all his thoughts on the horse
which still lay where it had fallen. “I do hope to goodness he isn’t
badly hurt.”

He sprang up the slope to the side of the mustang.

It was an anxious moment for Tom. His feeling of gratitude at his own
fortunate escape was for the moment almost forgotten as he bent over
the animal.

His blood-shot eyes and painfully heaving sides indicated a badly
distressed condition. There was an ugly cut on its right hind leg, and
several bruises caused by the horses falling upon him, but the Rambler
could discover no injuries that seemed to be of a serious nature.

“Hooray!” he almost shouted. “Just all in! A mighty narrow squeak,
though, sure enough! Ha, ha, Cranny, just wait till I see you again.
I’ve got a tale that’ll make you open your eyes!”

Tom felt in a rare good humor. It was certainly an adventure which
would sound well in Dave Brandon’s history of the club. Then his
thoughts suddenly reverted to Bob Somers. Unmindful of the wind or
rain he stood pondering deeply. He strove to reconstruct the scene in
his mind at the instant his companion had shouted. What had been Bob
Somers’ course?

“Oh! Of course, Bob’s all right,” he muttered, shrugging his shoulders.
“I’ll bet it never even ruffled his hair.”

Tom Clifton’s confidence in the other’s ability to take care of himself
under all circumstances was so great that he was easily able to dismiss
all worry concerning him and concentrate his thoughts on the situation
that confronted him.

With a gunny sack he washed the mud from the animal’s body; then by a
little gentle persuasion managed to get him up on his feet. He felt
convinced now that his diagnosis was correct, yet, from the way in
which the animal bore his weight on the injured leg, he realized that
he would be in no condition to travel for hours.

At the base of the hill a thick grove of cottonwoods suggested a
pleasant place for a camp. Tom, of course, well knew the danger of
seeking shelter under trees during a thunder-storm; but, by this
time, the lightning had passed far enough beyond for him to have no
hesitation.

He began to lead the mustang down the incline, finding to his great
satisfaction that it limped but slightly.

“That’s another fine piece of luck,” he reflected, gleefully. “Now if
the rain would only let up a bit, I wouldn’t kick about a single thing.”

A few minutes later he made a discovery which added still more to his
cheerful frame of mind. A tiny creek wound its way through the middle
of the valley.

“Hooray! All the comforts of a Mexican hotel without the expense!” he
chuckled. “I don’t mind, old boy, if we do have to spend a night all by
our lonesome!”

Beneath the thick, spreading foliage of the cottonwoods he found relief
from the steady drizzle.

After unsaddling the mustang and allowing the tired beast to rest for a
short time, he conducted him to the creek where he was watered a little
at a time until his thirst was quenched.

After returning to the cottonwoods, the Rambler got out his case of
medical supplies, many of which were labeled “good for either man or
beast,” and felt confident that with a little doctoring to assist the
course of nature the pony’s wound would soon be healed.

This job of bathing and bandaging the sore spot, owing to the beast’s
decided objections, took so long that by the time he finished the rain
had ceased and the storm clouds were far away.

The active Tom still found plenty to do. He cleaned his garments,
spread the heavy water-soaked saddle blanket over a limb to dry,
cleared a generous-sized space for his camp, then set about gathering
wood.

A short time later a fire crackled in a hollow and his meal was under
way. The situation appealed to the romantic side of Tom’s nature; it
also gave him a pleasant sense of manliness to reflect upon the ease
with which he could look out for himself. He thought of Don Stratton.
Don he felt sure would be filled with misgivings if placed in similar
circumstances.

“Still,” remarked Tom loftily to himself, “he hasn’t had enough
experience yet; confound these mosquitoes; it isn’t easy to find one’s
way over such a whopping big country. A little miscalculation,” he
smiled grimly, “and if a chap wasn’t well supplied with both food and
water, he might have some pretty rough sledding.”

The lad gazed at the curling tongues of ruddy flames growing brighter;
at the jumping sparks and the columns of smoke rising in whirling
clouds against the dark rich foliage of the cottonwoods. It seemed very
lonely. How nice it would be, he thought, if only all the crowd were
there. He began to miss sadly the sound of their voices--the cheerful
rattle of conversation.

This momentary weakness, however,--Tom considered it to be a
weakness--having passed, he began to whistle cheerfully.

“I’m not even going to bother about Bob’s bothering about me,” he
grinned. “He knows I can look out for myself all right.”

When his supper was cooked and eaten, the last traces of a rich
after-glow had entirely vanished, and shadows were creeping steadily
over the landscape, settling in deep, somber tones under the grove of
cottonwoods.

After washing his tin dishes in the creek and gathering sufficient
wood to last the night, Tom seated himself upon a large flat stone
near the fire. As the darkness increased, so the leaping tongues of
flame pierced it with greater brilliancy. Beyond the range of light
nature looked very dark and gloomy. Only the irregular outlines of the
hills and the vegetation crowning their summits could be seen with any
distinctness, and these were gradually becoming blurred and mysterious.

Tom was gazing reflectively at the fire when his hand suddenly touched
something in the pocket of his jacket. It was the book on cowboy life
presented to him by Jimmy Raymond.

“Ah, ha! here’s another slice of luck,” he exclaimed with a grin of
satisfaction. “This will help me pass the time.”

The Rambler became quite thoughtful when, on opening the little volume,
he saw the young pianist’s name written in a bold, legible hand on the
title page.

“Jimmy’s a dandy chap, all right,” he reflected. “Gee, I’ll never leave
this part of the country without finding out something about him--no
siree!”

The solitude of the night, with the incessant chant and hum of
insects coming from all directions, was conducive to thought, and Tom
allowed his to soar. Jimmy Raymond and the Texas Rangers became the
central figures of a drama which he considered would have made a very
interesting photo-play.

At last, however, tiring of this pastime, he drew up close to the fire,
and began to read the cowboy story. It proved to be such a lively yarn
of adventure that he sat up much longer than he had intended.

Just before the moon rose above the hills he rolled himself up in a
blanket and stretched himself out on the ground. And when the satellite
climbed high enough to flood the earth with its silvery light, its rays
fell on the form of a peacefully sleeping lad.

Many hours later, as Tom Clifton once again looked upon the world, he
discovered it to be a dimly lit and cheerless-looking place. A few
wisps of clouds near the eastern horizon were not even tinged with the
faintest color. Over the valley, over everything within the range of
vision, a succession of long, thick streamers of whitish mist hung low.
The early morning air was raw and chill.

Tossing aside his blanket, the lad rubbed his eyes and rose sleepily to
his feet.

“Humph!” he muttered, after a long, earnest stare. “Not a very joyous
sight, to be sure; one good thing, though, it’s jolly early.”

His first thoughts were for the mustang. The animal was contentedly
lying down, but at his approach scrambled to his feet in a manner that
indicated a great improvement in the condition of his injured leg.

“Fine and dandy, old chap,” declared Tom, grinning with satisfaction.
“Let’s have a look.”

An examination increased his grin.

“Bully!” was his comment. “Nothing now to prevent us from making a
quick get-away. A cold bite and then it’s the long ride for us.”

In the space of about twenty-five minutes his wants and those of
the mustang had been satisfied. After this, the lad repacked the
saddle-bags, filled the canvas water-bottles with cool water from the
creek, and lastly saddled his pony.

“Now, little chap,” he exclaimed, springing into the saddle, “let ’er
go!”

The landscape still presented the same cheerless aspect. Having
carefully consulted his compass Tom headed in a direction which took
him straight toward an impenetrable wall of gloomy mist.

To be once more actually on the way filled him with a huge sense of
satisfaction. Over ridges, across valleys now enveloped in the thick
vapors, jogging along in the half-light between, he made good progress.
And all the while the appearance of the world about him was gradually
changing. The clouds in the east had become tinged with delicate tones
of purple and gold, the rays of the rising sun shot high above them.

Tom in a receptive mood halted on the top of a high ridge to study
the glories of the awakening day. A glowing rim was rising above the
eastern hills. Slowly the whole of the pale golden ball rose into view,
and its rays, soon shooting across the wide landscape, transformed the
heavy, leaden gray vapors into objects of ethereal lightness.

“Dave would certainly call that ‘glorious,’” mused Tom with a smile.
His eyes followed a flock of birds circling high in the sky. “The chap
who doesn’t rise early in the morning misses a whole lot!”

It was so pleasant to watch the changes of nature that Tom continued
to stay until the mists were in full retreat before the strengthening
shafts of light.

His eyes, wandering from place to place, suddenly came to a halt on a
faint speck of dark far off in the valley.

Somehow or other, it did not have the appearance of a bush, or any
other kind of vegetation, but rather suggested to his mind the form of
some animal stretched at full length on the ground. His utmost efforts
to make out the exact nature of the object were unavailing, which, to
one who possessed as large a bump of curiosity as Tom, was a highly
unsatisfactory state of affairs.

“It’s so early I guess I can afford to take a bit of time,” he
reflected. “By George! I will!”

Having come to this conclusion, he set off down the incline, presently
reaching a grassy valley. From this point the irregular character of
the ground shut the odd-looking spot of dark from view.

It proved to be much farther off than Tom had supposed, and but for a
dogged determination to carry to a successful conclusion any task once
started, he might have faced about and ridden away.

“No, sir, I’m going to find out just what it is,” he exclaimed aloud.
He patted his mustang’s neck. “Luckily for both of us, old chap, your
leg’s nearly well.”

At last, skirting around a clump of trees to see a broad open expanse
stretching before him, he uttered an exclamation.

“I thought so!” he cried.

The dark object, though still some distance away, could now be
distinctly seen; and one swift glance proved sufficient to reveal the
fact that it was a prostrate steer.




CHAPTER XVIII

ON THE TRACK OF “RUSTLERS”


Of course, in that section of the country it was the most natural
thing in the world to come across roaming cattle; though the thought
instantly suggested itself to Tom that to see one so far separated from
a herd had an element of mystery in it.

“It’s mighty queer,” he murmured.

Curious to know what could have happened to the animal, he galloped
across the last stretch of ground at a rattling pace.

Reining up by the side of the fallen steer he sprang from the saddle
to make a discovery which considerably surprised him. Instead of the
motionless, inanimate form he had expected to find, the animal seemed
to have plenty of life left in him.

The huge, bulky form began to move. He was making desperate efforts to
struggle to his feet, but each time fell back with a ponderous thud to
the earth.

“Poor beast!” exclaimed Tom compassionately. “I’m mighty glad I decided
to come along.” He straightened up. “Cowboys never drive cattle so hard
as to make ’em fall over in a heap--no, sir, not by a long shot.”

Tying his horse to a near-by sapling he returned to the steer to make a
more careful examination.

He found there were no outward evidences of injuries, though everything
showed that the animal was in a complete state of exhaustion--so
complete that it had ceased all efforts to move, and but for its gently
heaving sides and half-closed eyes would have appeared quite lifeless
indeed.

Another idea came to Tom. There was scarcely any trace of the rain of
the day before, but here and there he thought the earth might still be
sufficiently soft to show tracks of passing cattle.

Not very long afterward he whistled softly; his eyes sparkling with a
peculiar light were turned in the direction of the rolling hills in the
west, over which the rising sun was casting a soft, mellow glow.

At his feet lay a little marshy tract; in various portions limpid
pools reflected the sky above. Here was the evidence he had been so
earnestly searching for. Imprints, and fresh imprints, too, of many
hoofs.

“Yes, sir; it looks to me as though a whopping big bunch has passed
this way,” he exclaimed. “By George--if it should be--I wonder----”

Frowning lines immediately appeared on Tom Clifton’s forehead;
his detective instincts were once more fully aroused. The whole
circumstance to his mind had a decidedly suspicious look--the steer
fallen by the wayside from exhaustion, the direction in which the
cattle had been driven. The more he considered the question, the
stronger became his conviction that cattle rustlers were at work again.

“By George! This is a discovery, sure enough!” he cried to the empty
air. “Now let’s see!”

The Rambler seated himself on the turf, where in a comfortable position
he pondered deeply for a considerable time.

How fine it would be, he reflected, if through his efforts some clue
to the whereabouts of the bandits’ stronghold could be obtained.
There were many places in the rugged country along the Rio admirably
adapted for their purposes. By making a little haste he might actually
trail them to the very spot and then--well, the Texas Rangers put in
possession of such valuable information ought to have no difficulty in
getting hot on their track.

In his imagination Tom could see all this accomplished. His face was
flushed.

“Yes, sir, I’ll try it,” he exclaimed. “Of course, Bob must realize
that I’m all right. Anyway, a few hours more or less can’t make much
difference now.”

All annoying reflections of this character fled from Tom Clifton’s
mind as he sprang to his feet. The dangers to which he might be
exposed, should his deductions prove correct, occurred to him, but were
dismissed with an impatient shrug of his shoulders and a thought voiced
aloud: “Well--it’s worth all the risk.”

He took another look at the prostrate steer, satisfying himself that
after a sufficient rest he would be all right again.

“Only wish I could do something to help you, old bovine,” he chuckled.
“Who knows? Maybe by keeling over you’ve done the Texas Rangers the
biggest kind of service.”

Unfastening his pony he leaped into the saddle and was off. Almost
every instant his eyes were keenly fixed on the ground, and often he
halted to examine patches of turf which still retained the slightest
signs of moisture. In the hollows, or where vegetation grew in
abundance, he often managed to pick up the trail.

It was a glorious morning; the dew on the leaves and grasses glittered
and sparkled like diamonds in the sunshine. Birds flitted from place to
place or from leafy coverlets sent their blithesome songs over the air.
Sometimes a jack-rabbit scampered across the rider’s path, and then in
headlong flight quickly disappeared from view.

Tom’s thoughts, however, were so intent upon the work in hand that he
paid but little attention either to the beauties of nature or the life
about him.

The difficulties of his self-imposed task made the Rambler all the
more determined to keep on, but half an hour’s ride was sufficient to
bring even his sanguine, hopeful nature to a realization that only
failure had repaid him for his hard, toilsome work.

For a long distance not a single evidence of the animals’ tracks was
to be seen, and the country farther to the west was becoming wild and
barren, where the difficulties of his task would be increased tenfold.
The hills, rugged and steep, partly covered with a scraggly growth
of mesquite and cactus, constantly increased in height. Between them
lay narrow, rocky gorges of a gloomy and sullen aspect, overrun with
treacherous roots or tangled thickets, the haunts of hordes of vicious
mosquitoes and myriads of other insects both winged and crawling.

“Yes, sir! I’ve lost all trace of it,” murmured the lad disconsolately.
“If a band of rustlers were really behind those cattle, they must have
known a much better route to the Rio than the one I’ve taken.”

From the sloping side of a ridge he could see on every hand a wild and
desolate expanse of country; vast, impressive and silent. Now Tom
could understand more fully the difficulties under which the Texas
Rangers worked. Nature, here, had provided excellent hiding places for
outlaws; and as an aid to them in case of discovery there were natural
barricades from behind which they could almost defy their enemies.

“It’s a peach of a place for ’em, sure enough,” declared Tom. He slid
off his pony’s back, in another moment examining the animal’s injured
leg. It had withstood the traveling well, and appeared to be nearly
healed.

“Fine!” he commented. Then seating himself on a bit of rock he
reflectively gazed up at the pink clouds floating lazily in a field
of palish blue. Tom had, of course, been greatly disappointed; his
bright visions of lending valuable aid to the Rangers were almost
dashed--almost, because, even now, a vague hope seemed to be urging him
on. But for thoughts of Bob Somers and the others he would not have
hesitated an instant--the Rio Grande, he reflected, couldn’t be so
very far away, and once there, possibly something of interest might be
discovered.

There was naturally only one result to be expected from the mental
arguments which he indulged in with himself. The affirmative side
now--a few hours more and his companions would see him again; so why
bother further?

“Of course,” cried Tom briskly, “I won’t! I’m all ready now, old
chap--let’s be on the move!”

Then began another hard fatiguing journey, with the traveling becoming
increasingly difficult.

At length the lad, mopping his perspiring face, was murmuring his
intention of making a long halt in the first shade he could find, when
the sound of horses’ hoofs, coming from the top of the ridge just above
him, instantly drove away all feelings of discomfort.

With a sharp exclamation he pulled up, while thoughts of cattle
rustlers and bandits rushed back to his mind in full force. Tom had so
completely given up any idea of encountering other human beings in this
wild section of the country, that now he felt his nerves beginning to
tingle, his heart to beat faster.

“Ah!” he breathed an instant later.

The figure of a horse and rider abruptly appeared above the crest of
the hill, slowly rising higher and higher until both in full view were
silhouetted in bold relief against the sky. The two, almost giant
specimens of their species, formed a magnificent picture as the glow
of the early morning sun fell across their figures. Now having come
to a halt, they suggested in their motionless state rather a great
equestrian statue than living, breathing creatures.

One swift, comprehensive glance had shown Tom Clifton. An elderly,
gray-bearded, patriarchal-looking man he was, every line in his bronzed
face telling of his nationality.

“A Mexican!” muttered Tom. Then mastering himself he exclaimed in even
tones:

“Good-morning, sir!”

He was vaguely conscious of the fact that the other appeared to be
studying him with considerably more interest and attention than a
chance meeting between two strangers would seem to warrant. Another
thing, too, impressed itself upon his mind. This man had evidently
seen him approaching from a considerable distance, for he exhibited no
signs of surprise.

“Buenas dias, señor,” came the greeting.

The Mexican spoke in a kindly, friendly tone, and Tom’s disturbing
thoughts immediately fled.

“Good-morning,” he said again. Then without further hesitation he
flipped his reins, and the mustang’s sharp hoofs were once more digging
into the hard, stony ground.

Riding up by the stranger’s side he addressed him in English only to
see him shake his head uncomprehendingly. The situation, however, was
saved from any embarrassing features by the Mexican’s sense of humor.
He laughed heartily and extended his hand, which Tom smilingly shook.

Thus, the American and Mexican faced each other on the top of the ridge
for several instants in silence, Tom heartily wishing all the while
that he possessed a sufficient knowledge of the Spanish language to put
a few questions to him.

An entirely different air distinguished this man from the majority of
Mexicans he had seen in the little town across the Rio.

His age, of course, precluded the idea of his being a vaquero. Besides,
everything about him seemed to indicate that he occupied a much higher
station in life. He wondered why the Mexican was roaming about the
country alone--or was he alone? A startling thought flashed through his
mind. Had this man any connection with the cattle rustlers--might he
not be one of the band acting as a sentinel? Desperados did not always
look the part!

Tom Clifton, with his love of mysteries, began to think that he had now
stumbled upon another, which might prove to be fully as interesting
as the one his imagination had woven about the young pianist of the
Mexican theater.

“I do wonder----” he thought; then with a little start he realized that
the other was speaking. The words themselves were meaningless, but the
man’s actions perfectly clear. The Mexican wished the lad to follow
him. Highly puzzled, Tom nodded his head. Then side by side they rode
until, skirting around the side of a jagged ridge that rose high above
their heads, his eyes took in a view which brought the cry: “The Rio
Grande!” from his lips.

Yes--the great river appeared right before him. Its muddy water,
faintly tinged in places with reflections from the brilliant sky, was
flowing near the base of a line of rugged, almost perpendicular bluffs.

“Well, well, I certainly never expected to run across it so soon as
this!” he exclaimed.

He felt a touch on his arm. The gray-bearded Mexican’s gaze was fixed
intently upon the opposite shore where the hills loomed up bright in
the sunshine.

“My country!” he exclaimed in English.

What a wealth of meaning those two words, quietly spoken, seemed to
express. The man, sitting almost motionless in his saddle, a troubled
look in his piercing black eyes, seemed just then to typify the sorrows
of that great land, brought to misery and suffering by so much internal
dissension.

For several moments the two let their eyes wander over the vast stretch
of country before them. Tom was the first to speak.

“Don’t you know any other words of English?” he inquired.

The answer was a shake of the head. By means of expressive gestures,
however, the Mexican very easily conveyed to Tom’s mind a desire to
know in which direction he was bound. This information being supplied,
a look of much surprise came over his sunburned face, as though he
could not understand why the lad should travel as far as the river only
to turn right back.

Tom, realizing the hopelessness of attempting oral explanations, wisely
concluded to confine his efforts to communicate to the clumsy, though
useful medium of gestures, and in this way signified his intention of
starting off at once. The Mexican with a benevolent smile made it known
that he should like to accompany him, to which request Tom at once
assented.

He reflected that there was nothing at all unusual about this. The man
might be on his way to visit some of the ranches that lay to the east.
At any rate he found his company a most agreeable change after the long
hours of solitude and silence.

He soon discovered, too, that the horseman possessed an intimate
knowledge of the surrounding country, for, acting as guide, he
conducted him over a route much easier than the one by which he had
come. And this resulted in their reaching the undulating prairie far
sooner, and with much less fatigue than would otherwise have been the
case.

“This is something else to talk about,” mused Tom. “I guess Cranny will
wish to thunder he had come along with Bob and me. Honest, I’d give a
lot to know who this chap is, and where he’s bound.”

As the two for mile after mile jogged along side by side across the
prairie, all sorts of ideas concerning the Mexican ran through Tom
Clifton’s head. He hadn’t yet managed to dismiss the thought that there
was something decidedly mysterious about him.

“Perhaps he’s a Mexican general, who has come over to the United States
on some mission,” he reflected, “or he may be seeking safety from his
enemies.”

The depths of patriotism expressed both in the man’s face and actions,
when he had looked upon the land of his fathers, made Tom feel that
somehow the rustler theory was rather untenable, though he was still
not yet prepared to dismiss it altogether from his mind.

The lad was always expecting the Mexican to bid him adieu, but as time
passed on he showed no inclination to do so.

“It’s mighty odd,” muttered Tom, “that my direction should be exactly
the same as his direction. It’s another thing I don’t quite understand!”

At last, growing tired of speculations and deductions, which he
reflected would certainly never solve the matter, he thrust them all
from his mind, becoming more conscious from that moment of the heat and
the glare of light which enveloped the landscape.

Reaching the heights of a ridge the two looked down upon a valley, to
see far-off herds of grazing cattle. At the right a faint bluish smudge
rising above the low chain of hills attracted Tom’s attention.

“Hello!” he exclaimed, “I’ll bet that’s a cowboys’ camp.” He turned
quickly and discovered the Mexican eying him with a most peculiar
smile. It instantly faded, however, when the latter observed his
action. Once more Tom became impressed with the idea that for some
reason he was an object of special interest to this man whom he had so
unexpectedly encountered.

“By George! It’s about the queerest thing I ever ran up against!” he
muttered. “I’ll steer straight for that camp, and, if there are any
cow-punchers among the bunch who speak a few words of the Spanish
lingo, maybe they can put me wise.”

A sweep of his hand told the Mexican of his resolve, at which an
expression of undisguised astonishment, so plain as to admit of no
mistake, flashed for a second over the other’s face.

Tom saw his keen searching eyes fixed full upon him; they seemed to
travel slowly from the soles of his shoes to the high peaked crown of
his sombrero. Then with a slight shrug of his shoulders, the man’s
benevolent smile returned and cracking his whip he galloped down the
slope.

Not long after the two horsemen were riding among Colonel Brookes
Sylvester’s great herds of cattle. Hundreds of them were contentedly
browsing over the hillsides or along the rich pasture lands of the
valley.

It was not always an easy matter to keep that thin column of smoke in
view, for many times ridges or thick clumps of vegetation came between.

Therefore, Tom was highly pleased when they finally rode over a ridge
and saw the cowboys’ camp at the base of a gently-sloping surface which
extended before them.

A big chuck-wagon stood in the shadow of a grove of cottonwoods. Around
a smouldering fire a number of shirt-sleeved men had gathered and every
one was staring hard toward them.

“That’s the finest sight I’ve seen for some time!” cried Tom,
enthusiastically. “Hooray!”

The mustang, responding to his commands, broke into a swift gallop
which carried him in a moment to the cottonwoods where, with a hearty
salutation to the cowboys, he slipped from his horse.

Their actions filled him with the greatest astonishment. They were
looking at him as though in open-mouthed wonder. He heard them
speaking, in low excited tones; he saw the biggest, a man well over six
feet in height, step forward, extending a huge brown hand toward him.
Then his amazement was made complete when he listened to these words,
spoken in a loud chuckling tone:

“Shake, Jimmy Raymond. We’re sartinly more’n glad to see you.”




CHAPTER XIX

CAPTURED BY COWBOYS


“Jimmy Raymond!” gasped Tom. “What do you mean?”

“Business, Jimmy!” came the terse answer. “Our fellows have been
a-lookin’ fer ye; so has the Texas Rangers, to say nothin’ o’ Jake
Raigan the sheriff--but what made ye come? Was it our Mexican pard
yonder; or did ye git tired of the lonesome trail?”

“Sure enough it’s Jimmy!” broke in one of the others. “Jist as the
colonel says. One o’ the longest boys in all creation. Wal, Blimby, I
call this here a fine piece o’ luck.”

“Yessir, an’ that’s truer’n many things ye say, Dan,” grinned a third.
He was studying Tom with critical attention. “Yessir, that’s him all
right. ‘Kind o’ big mouth,’ says the colonel, an’ ‘cheeky lookin’’--ha,
ha, ha, ho. There ain’t a-goin’ to be no get-away for Jimmy Raymond
this time.--No siree.”

The men laughed and chuckled in a manner which showed them to be in a
most highly pleased state of mind, while Tom, his eyes flashing, looked
from them to the complacent, smiling Mexican and back again.

The man’s mysterious ways were all perfectly clear to him now. He,
falling into the same error as the cowboys, had taken him to be the
young pianist of the Mexican theater. And Tom was forced to admit
that the mistake was a natural one, for a description of Jimmy would
certainly tally in many respects with his own.

The humor of the situation appealing to him irresistibly he began to
roar with laughter, a proceeding which had the effect of promptly
sobering the expressions on the cowboys’ faces. They had evidently
expected Tom to accept the matter in a very different way, for Blimby
broke forth into a string of wondering comments.

“He’s a slick one--ain’t he, boys? Thinks he can fool us, eh? Not much;
this outfit’s just as sharp as the Texas Rangers any day. ‘A hard one
to manage,’ says the colonel. ‘Not if we ever git our flippers on him,’
says I. So them stage laughs won’t do ye no good, pard--it’s the
‘Eagle Pass’ Ranch for you!”

“The ‘Eagle Pass’ Ranch,” repeated Tom.

“I reckon he never even heard o’ the Eagle Pass!” put in Dan, in a tone
which suggested a mixture of scorn and amusement. “Come now, young
fellow!” He advanced and shaking his finger under Tom’s nose added
almost threateningly, “Own up now! quick! Did ye ever hear of Colonel
Brookes Sylvester?”

“Certainly!” answered Tom, his eyes opening wider.

“Wal, that’s a little better. I’ve got good news for ye, Jimmy. The
colonel says as how ye can do jist as ye please. Ain’t that fine, boy?”
He playfully poked Tom in the ribs. “Ain’t it now?”

“Say! Why is everybody camping on the trail of Jimmy Raymond?” blurted
out Tom. “What in thunder has he done? Is this Colonel Brookes
Sylvester a relative of his?”

The speech was received in absolute silence, but it lasted only until
the man had recovered from a genuine case of astonishment.

[Illustration: “OWN UP--NOW!”]

“Wal! I certainly never heard anything to beat that!” roared Dan,
violently. “Take his hoss, Blimby. He’s even a heap sight worse’n the
colonel let on!”

“His nerve is simply amazing!” growled the big cowboy.

“Now just look here!” protested Tom. “This way we’re not getting
anywhere at all!”

“Jist the same you’ll be a-gettin’ somewhere mighty soon!” chuckled
one of the others. He called to the Mexican, who, having dismounted,
was surveying the scene from a little distance with a highly puzzled
expression. As the man came forward, a few words spoken in the Spanish
language brought a look of understanding to his face. The benevolent
expression was immediately replaced by a stern, hard glare, which he
leveled full on the Rambler’s face.

Two of Tom Clifton’s faults in the past had been a lack of diplomacy,
which, coupled with a highly sensitive disposition, often made his
words and actions misunderstood. Many lessons dearly bought, however,
had at last brought about a change. And now Tom, instead of flying
into a temper, accepted his unusual situation in a philosophical manner.

“I’ll tell you this much,” he said calmly. “My name is Tom Clifton. But
I know where Jimmy Raymond is.”

“So do we,” said Blimby. “Say, ain’t that a book in your pocket?” He
looked with a significant expression toward his companions. “Jist let’s
take a peep at it, son!”

And thus it was that the little volume on cowboy life which Jimmy had
presented to the Rambler began to take a part in the proceedings. Tom,
realizing that this bit of circumstantial evidence would absolutely
prove to the minds of the men the truth of their contentions, attempted
to parry Blimby’s questions.

The cowboy, however, grimly shook his head.

“No use, lad! The colonel told us somethin’ about them books ye read.
Trot it out.”

“Yes, sir, you’ve got to!” came from another.

“Skeered, eh?” jeered Dan. “Come now----” His lean brown hand was
thrust toward the pocket of Tom’s khaki jacket, but the agile lad
easily side-stepped out of reach.

“Oh, yes, I know’d it!” grinned Blimby. “Now he’s caught with the
goods! Hand it over.”

“Call around to-morrow!” grinned Tom. “You don’t have to see it!”

“Yes, sir, we do!” The man who made this speech came briskly forward,
and Tom found himself facing three smiling though determined-looking
cowboys, while several others looked on.

“Really this is quite provoking!” said Tom.

“Sure; mirth provokin’,” remarked Blimby. “Oh, good for you, Dan!”

Dan, by a rapid movement, had snatched the book from its reposing place
and was examining, with keen interest, the wonderfully rearing horse on
the cover.

“See here, you’re going too far!” shouted Tom, indignantly.

“No, jist far enough,” grinned Dan. He held the book up at arm’s length.

A storm of laughter came from the men.

“I know’d it, I know’d it!” roared Blimby. “Exactly what Colonel
Sylvester said. Daffy on the cowboy game. Ha, ha, ho, ho! An’ here’s
his name writ on the inside. Boys, mebbe the colonel won’t give us the
glad hand when we take this prize over to the ranch.”

“Well, if that’s all you want, let’s go right away,” said Tom.

No violent outburst of anger or protest could have made half the
impression on the cow-punchers as did these words. The loud hilarity
instantly came to an end. Blimby was dreadfully puzzled; his face
showed it.

“That’s the cleverest bit yit,” he exclaimed. “But it won’t work no
better’n than the others. Now, pard, jist one question: where was ye
bound when the greaser copped ye?”

“Over to detachment quarters of the Texas Rangers!” answered Tom
smilingly. “Our crowd is staying there. Shall I tell you----?”

“No, nuthin’ more!” fairly yelled Blimby. “This is sure the worst case
I ever run up ag’in. Climb aboard yer prairie schooner, feller. Mebbe
ye’ll know now that the jig’s all up!”

“Well, it strikes me that since seeing Bob Somers last I’ve had a
pretty large time,” murmured Tom, with a grin. “I intended to take a
jaunt over to Colonel Sylvester’s ranch anyway.” Then aloud he added,
“You chaps are going to be mighty badly disappointed--too bad! I’ll
take my book, please!”

“He ain’t himself; but it’s his book,” jeered Dan, putting the volume
into his hand. “Who’s goin’ to take him over?”

“I am,” exclaimed Blimby, in his loud gruff voice. He untied his horse
and mounted, motioning Tom to get on his own. Tom obeyed. Then, with a
nod to the gray-bearded Mexican, and a hearty “So-long, fellows,” to
the group of cow-punchers, he rode off by the side of Blimby.

Blimby he found was a very pleasant chap. He declined to answer any
of his eager questions concerning Jimmy Raymond with this terse
observation: “You can’t kid me, boy.” About the venerable looking
Mexican, however, he was more communicative.

“A nice old chap,” he said, an odd look coming over his face. “He ain’t
been around these parts very long. Every onct in a while one o’ the
bunch has run across him; but the fellers who can parlez his tongue a
bit says he won’t ever do no talkin’ about himself.”

“Well, what is he doing in Texas?” demanded Tom.

“He don’t seem to be doin’ nothin’ ’cept ridin’ his hoss about, an’
mostly over there by the Rio,” responded the cowboy. “Yes, he’s acting
kind o’ queer, for a fact, but there ain’t no law ag’in it. Who told
him to watch out for Jimmy Raymond? Why, every cow-puncher who could
git it over in Spanish. But don’t rile me, son, a-talkin’ about Jimmy.”

Several hours after leaving the cowboys’ camp the two rode past the
town-site of Sylvester, a short time later sighting the ranch buildings
belonging to the colonel.

Everything about the appearance of the spacious adobe house, and the
barns, sheds and fenced corrals surrounding it, was in accordance with
the reputation and wealth of their owner.

As the cow-puncher and Tom rode up, a tall, soldierly looking man,
seated on the wide veranda which extended around the entire house,
hastily rose to his feet. His first glance brought a peculiar light
into his stern, gray eyes. He stepped forward eagerly, then with a
nearer view of the approaching riders, the light began to fade.

“I say, Colonel, ain’t this him?” cried Blimby, hopefully.

The answer proved to be a bitter disappointment to the cowboy.

“No, Blimby!” responded Colonel Sylvester. “Though he is just about
the same size and figure. But ’pon my word I must hear all about
this at once! Tie your horses, boys, and come right up! This is most
astonishing. Never was more surprised in my life!”

Tom was enjoying the situation immensely, though he couldn’t help
feeling sorry for the disconcerted Blimby, who presently sank
dejectedly into a chair on the veranda.

Facing the colonel, Tom Clifton, in his easy, offhand style, began to
answer his questions. He spoke rapidly, for he realized that by this
time Bob Somers and the others must be considerably worried about him,
and he wanted to be on his way as soon as possible.

His words: “I met Jimmy Raymond in Mexico,” brought Colonel Brookes
Sylvester to his feet. The ranchman appeared to be as excited as a man
of his stern, forceful nature could ever be. With one hand resting on
the arm of his chair and the other on Tom Clifton’s shoulder, he urged
him to tell all he knew about the young pianist.

Tom did so at a commendable rate of speed. The colonel listened with
the most eager attention; the light had come into his eyes once more,
though there was a troubled note in his voice when he said:

“Jimmy in that land of anarchy and disorder! I don’t like to think
about it!” Then sinking back in his chair, he remained silent for a
moment, unheeding Tom’s question, put with the lad’s characteristic
bluntness: “Who is Jimmy Raymond, Colonel Sylvester?”

“The colonel’s nephew!” said Blimby, answering for him.

A sudden recollection of hearing some of the Texas Rangers speak about
a lad, who was occasioning Colonel Sylvester considerable trouble
and worry, sprang into Tom Clifton’s mind. Jimmy must be that lad, he
decided.

“The facts regarding Jimmy, who is my sister’s son, are these,” said
the ranchman when he resumed speaking. “The boy, whose home is at
Brownsville, had an intense longing to be a cowboy, and also the
wanderlust had seized him. Receiving no encouragement in either of
these ideas he considered himself very badly used indeed.”

“A cowboy’s life ain’t nothin’ to hanker after,” remarked Blimby,
frankly.

“We did our best to make Jimmy understand that,” continued Colonel
Sylvester, with a faint smile. “His father ardently wished him to study
law, but that profession had no attraction for him.”

“That’s mighty odd,” commented Tom. “Why, our Bob is going to be a
lawyer.”

“When Jimmy’s parents went to New York on an extended visit they left
him in charge of Mr. Raymond’s partner. The lad stood this arrangement
for a short while; then, after leaving a note for his temporary
guardian, he and his savings left Brownsville together.”

“Humph!” muttered Tom.

“He headed straight for the ‘Eagle Pass’ Ranch, thinking, of course,
that I should see the matter from his point of view. I told the lad
bluntly, however, that he was not at all suited for such a life, and
ordered him to return to Brownsville forthwith.”

“And he didn’t,” said Tom.

“No, not a bit of it. I found that he possessed far more spirit and
courage than I had ever given him credit for. The rebellious Jimmy,
disagreeing with everybody, immediately took himself away to parts
unknown.”

“Just like a kid!” growled the cowboy.

“After vainly trying to find some trace of him, I became worried enough
to put the matter into the hands of the authorities. I feel certain
that Jimmy must have found out about this, and perhaps thought he would
be subjected to the disgrace of arrest, and hauled before a justice. He
is a sensitive, high-strung boy, and no doubt his feelings were deeply
wounded.”

“I think you are right, sir,” said Tom. “For whenever I happened to
mention the Texas Rangers a very curious expression always came over
his face.”

The ranchman rising to his feet began to pace the floor. “My mind has
been greatly relieved in a way,” he resumed meditatively, “and yet”--he
paused--“and yet I can’t help feeling deeply concerned about Jimmy’s
safety in that Mexican town!”

“It sure ain’t no place for a kid,” exclaimed the cowboy. “The Mexican
rebs, before very long, is sure to blow the whole bloomin’ place to
bits!”

“Blimby!” Colonel Sylvester spoke in sharp, earnest tones, “something
has to be done, and at once. But for the fact that I have a very
important stock deal on hand and engagements with some representatives
of Eastern buyers, I’d go myself. You ought not to be spared from the
range just at this time when cattle rustlers are apt to swoop down on
the herds; but better a thousand times that they should take every
steer I own than to let anything happen to Jimmy. You must----”

“I don’t think so, Colonel,” interrupted Tom, quietly. “Bob Somers and
I will go after Jimmy to-day, explain how things are, and bring him
right back to you.”

“Why, my dear boy, I couldn’t think of allowing you to assume such a
risk!” protested the ranchman.

“But he and I intended to go back a bit later on, in any event,” said
the Rambler with a smile. “Please just leave it to us. Do I know the
danger? Oh, yes--though it probably isn’t so very great, sir.”

Then followed a long earnest discussion during which Blimby, who hadn’t
any great desire to set foot on Mexican soil, remained discreetly
silent.

“Tom!” exclaimed the colonel, at length, holding out his hand, “you’ve
won your point and also my everlasting gratitude. Tell Jimmy I’ll give
him a chance to be a cowboy if he still desires to try that sort of
life.”

“That’s sure the best way to bust that beautiful dream o’ hisn,”
commented Blimby.

“You may expect to see Jimmy very soon,” said Tom. Then suddenly
recalling his experience of the early morning he related the
particulars to the ranchman.

The Rambler was quite disappointed. Instead of creating a sensation,
as he had half expected, not the slightest change of expression came
over Colonel Sylvester’s face, though he listened with attention
jotting down several notes on a piece of paper.

“Think you could find the location of this place Tom speaks about?” he
asked, turning to Blimby.

“Certain sure, Colonel,” responded the cowboy. “’Tain’t so very far
from where the old Mexican hangs out in an old tumble-down shack. By
thunder! son, mebbe you’ve struck somethin’ worth followin’ up.” Blimby
suddenly lowered his voice; then, looking up and down as if he feared
his words might be overheard, he added, “I don’t know as how I ought to
say it, Colonel, but--but----”

“Go ahead, Blimby,” said the ranchman, encouragingly.

“I’ve had me s’picions about that there old chap. Ye see it weren’t
so very long after the rustlers got to work ag’in that he bobs up,
smilin’. This young chap asks me about him--I didn’t say nothin’ much;
but now--hang it all, after this tale o’ hisn, ain’t I got a right to?”

Tom Clifton, whose eyes had brightened tremendously, was on the point
of blurting out that he too had thought of exactly the same thing, when
by a strong effort he repressed the temptation and instead remained
silent while Colonel Sylvester spoke up. “We mustn’t jump at hasty
conclusions, Blimby,” he said. “It might be wiser not to express such
thoughts.”

“Mebbe,” admitted the cowboy, twirling his sombrero. “But it strikes me
the old Mexican’s too perlite an’ smilin’ to be all right.”

“Now, Tom,” exclaimed the ranchman, “kindly step this way.” The Rambler
followed him inside the house, and a few moments later they entered the
handsomely furnished library.

Colonel Sylvester called his attention to a telephone resting on a
table.

“I wish you would call up Captain Julius Braddock at company
headquarters,” he said, “and tell him about your experience.”

“Yes, sir,” answered Tom.

He lifted the transmitter to his mouth, and presently he and Captain
Braddock at the far-away Ranger headquarters, by means of the wire
stretching across the lonely prairie, were hearing each other’s voices
almost as distinctly as though they were standing but a few feet apart.

The Ranger chief expressed a few words of surprise on learning to whom
he was speaking.

“And actually at the ‘Eagle Pass’ Ranch,” he exclaimed. “Is the colonel
there?--good. I must have a word with him. What’s that--you have
something interesting to tell me--fine--fine; go right ahead!”

Whether his story made any impression on Captain Braddock or not Tom
was unable to tell. The former told him, however, that the Texas
Rangers always investigated even the smallest clues, and Colonel
Sylvester could depend upon the policemen’s looking thoroughly into the
matter.

“I’ll relay the information at once to detachment quarters,” came over
the wire. “On your way there now, are you?--good. You will be able
to give Sergeant Howell all the necessary directions for finding the
place. Good-bye. Please tell the colonel I want him on the ’phone.”

During the few minutes’ conversation which took place between the two
men, Tom found it hard to control his growing impatience. He gave an
audible sigh of relief when the instrument was set back on the table
and Colonel Sylvester faced him.

“I’m going, sir,” he said.

“So soon!”

“Yes, sir--I reckon if everything goes right Bob Somers and I will
start for Mexico this very afternoon.”

The lad walked briskly outside, to find Blimby already in the saddle.

Colonel Sylvester’s face wore a much disturbed expression when, not
many minutes afterward, he warmly shook Tom Clifton’s hand, spoke a few
words of adieu to him and the cowboy, and watched both galloping off
side by side.

“A brave, daring young chap!” he murmured. “But I almost wish now I
hadn’t consented to the lad’s going on an errand where there is a
possibility of his being exposed to so much danger.”




CHAPTER XX

UNDER FIRE


At four o’clock on the following morning the little frontier town in
Mexico began to be the theater of some exciting events.

A Constitutionalist cavalry force, numbering several thousand, under
cover of darkness had formed a ring of steel to the west and south. And
while the inhabitants, lulled to a sense of security and indifference
by the long delay, slept on in peace, the artillery got into action.

The siege was on.

The rattle and boom of machine and field guns in the dreamy silence of
the morning made a din which probably aroused every one in town.

At the very first detonations four Americans in the hotel facing the
plaza sprang from their beds.

Dick Travers and Cranny Beaumont occupied a room together. As a faint,
rosy light from the eastern sky dimly illumined the interior, they
stared at one another, their eyes brightening with excitement.

“Great Scott!” cried Dick, breaking a strained silence, “so it’s come
at last, eh! We’d better tumble into our togs, and get out of this!”

“Listen!” exclaimed Cranny breathlessly.

The report of a shell, bursting not far away, had drowned, for an
instant, the steady rattling and booming of guns which came from the
distance.

“There’s going to be a hot time, all right!” almost shouted Dick, with
a leap reaching the window.

The big plaza, quiet but a few moments before, began echoing to the
tread of hurried feet. The sound of loud and excited voices, and the
sharp clatter of horses’ hoofs as a mounted rurale galloped across
jarred noisily on the air.

Cranny sprang to his companion’s side. A soft glow from the early
morning sun suffused the scene, lighting up the bell tower of the
ancient adobe church with poetic effect.

Somewhere a bugle was blown; from another point came an answer, in the
same musical notes.

As another loud explosion was heard and a cloud of white smoke rose
above the roofs of a group of buildings to the north the boys concluded
to lose no more time.

“Those shells aren’t a bit particular where they drop!” gasped Dick,
“and if one should happen to----”

“Quite right!” said Cranny with a faint grin.

As fast as they had ever done in their lives the two slipped into their
clothes, and were just in the act of adding the last finishing touches,
when a peremptory bang on the door panel sounded simultaneously with
the voice of George Parry: “Hurry up! We’re waiting for you, boys!” he
yelled loudly. “Don’t waste an instant!”

Dick flung the door wide open. Outside in the corridor stood the three
Americans.

“Boys,” exclaimed Professor Kent, in calm, even tones, “you’d better
saddle your horses without a moment’s delay and make straight for the
International bridge--ah!”

Heavy rifle firing from the intrenched Federal troops, defending the
town, had just started up, and the roar of their cannon, replying to
the Constitutionalists’ fire, gave an indication that the battle would
be desperately waged.

“And stay in Texas until this scrap is over,” exclaimed Ralph Edmunds.
“I’m mighty glad those other two chaps are safely out of it. We’ll see
you as far as the bridge and----”

Cranny Beaumont, his face fairly shining with excitement, shook his
head emphatically.

“I’ll not budge an inch from this town until we find Jimmy Raymond!” he
cried.

“Of course we won’t!” chimed in Dick.

“By George, I’d clean forgotten about him!” declared the newspaper man,
hurriedly. “He struck me as being a helpless sort of chap, too. Yes;
that’s our first duty--come on, fellows!”

As the party dashed down-stairs and out on the veranda, they saw the
big square filled with a panic-stricken mob of men, women and children,
hurrying in all directions, some burdened down with bundles and bags.

It was almost impossible to associate the place with the calm of those
moonlit evenings when the strains of soft music floated over the air,
and laughing, black-eyed señoritas promenaded to and fro beneath the
shadows of the mulberry trees. The boys gathered the sense of the scene
without seeing many of its details. They could think only of the young
pianist, who, as he listened to the firing and the commotion in the
streets, must be experiencing feelings of dreadful fear.

“Poor Jimmy!” muttered Dick. “We must get him out of this mighty soon!”

To their great relief they found the stableman and the hotel proprietor
in the building at the rear.

A rapid volley of Spanish came from both men when they dashed pell-mell
inside. But only Edmunds understood the meaning of their words.

“What do they say?” panted Cranny.

“That the other side of the Rio Grande is the safest place for us all,”
responded the newspaper man, rapidly. “Of course,” he shrugged his
shoulders, “I’m too accustomed to the smell of powder and smoke and the
rattle of guns to let a thing like this make me want to cut and run.
But,” he paused to let the import of his words sink deeply into their
minds, “remember; any one who stays in this town is taking his life in
his hands.”

“I should rather say so!” said Parry, cheerfully.

It was still dark in the stable, but by the pale, weak rays of a couple
of ill-smelling oil lanterns they managed to saddle the horses. The
little burro was not disturbed.

The mustangs, scenting danger, reared, plunged or snorted, and when
free of restraining halters made every effort to dash away.

By this time the danger had greatly increased. A shell, dropping on
one of the market stands in the plaza, and exploding with a terrific
report, sent a shower of lumber, boxes, and baskets in all directions,
besides shattering every pane of glass in the buildings near by.

“Now it’s your turn to get a whiff of smoke and powder!” cried the
special correspondent. “Everybody ready? Come on then, to the rescue of
Jimmy, and keep your eyes open!”

Leading the mustangs outside, men and boys sprang into the saddles.
There was no need to use either quirt or spurs on the frightened
animals. They started off, even before their riders were comfortably
seated, and at a speed which endangered the safety of the ever-moving
throngs of Mexicans, clattered across the broad plaza.

The slowly strengthening rays of the sun and the reflections of the
golden orb itself, flashing like jets of flame from some of the
upper windows, gave a singular air of peace and tranquillity to the
scene strangely out of harmony with the noise, the confusion and the
excitement in the narrow, twisting streets.

What with the roar of the artillery, the incessant crackling of rifles,
the occasional bursting of a shell, and the realization that they were
just as likely to be running into danger as out of it, Cranny Beaumont
found his longing for thrills fully gratified.

As the horsemen swung into the street on which Jimmy Raymond’s hotel
was located, they observed behind barricades of beams and sand-bags
piled on the roofs of some of the higher buildings the tops of tall
conical hats and gleams on rifle barrels.

In the crowded street they were often obliged to slow up, much to
the annoyance of Edmunds, who perhaps understood more fully than his
companions the grave peril of their situation. His one object was to
get the lads on the United States side of the International bridge, and
every instant he was experiencing a dull, deadly fear that something
might happen to prevent him from carrying out this plan.

Now and again rurales came galloping along, by their reckless riding
and loud yells adding to the turmoil. There were no cries of “Gringo”
heard just now; the Mexicans, intent upon their own troubles, scarcely
seemed to notice the presence of the Americans in their midst.

“By Jove! I was never gladder to see anything in my life!” shouted Dick
to Cranny. The hotel with the big cottonwoods in front had just loomed
into view. “I reckon the poor chap is having the scare of his life.”

“Maybe he won’t be glad to see us!” responded Cranny.

As the four clattered up to the entrance, the Tacoma lad slipped off
the back of his plunging horse and thrust the bridle into Dick Travers’
hands.

“I’ll get him out, fellows,” he gasped. Then an expression of dismay
came over his features. For the first time he had taken a careful look
at the building. It wore a silent and deserted appearance.

“I was afraid of it!” groaned Edmunds. “But for goodness’ sake,
Cranny----”

The lad had already dashed toward the open door, so the newspaper man’s
sentence remained unfinished.

Cranny Beaumont felt that his mission was doomed to failure; a loud
ringing yell uttered when he reached the foot of the stairs only
brought back a series of hollow, weird echoes. He rushed up, calling
as he went, “Jimmy, hello, Jimmy, are you here? Jimmy!” And still no
answer from the young pianist came to his ears.

The door of the room stood wide open and one glance inside told him
that his fears were well founded--Jimmy was gone. The Texas boy’s
belongings lay scattered about in the greatest confusion. Everything
pointed to the fact that he had made a hurried exit.

“Nothin’ doin’!” groaned Cranny. “Maybe he’s safe on the other side o’
the Rio an’ maybe he isn’t! Now I wonder what we’d better---- Great
Scott!”

A frightful explosion, which seemed fairly to jar the boards beneath
his feet, accompanied by the sounds of breaking glass, sent him,
pale-faced and trembling, against the wall. With a dreadful fear
tugging at his heart, he heard a wild clamor in the street just below
and saw a column of white smoke rising against the low adobe building
on the opposite side of the street.

Cranny Beaumont’s terror lasted only an instant. Rushing down-stairs
at topmost speed, he made for the street, uttering a cry of dismay
when he discovered that the horsemen were no longer grouped before the
entrance. Nor did he see any one else. Men, women, and children had all
vanished.

In the wall of the building across the way he saw a large gaping hole,
shattered glass and a partly demolished balcony. From the windows came
puffs of smoke.

The Tacoma lad grasped the situation on the instant. The horses,
rendered unmanageable, had taken fright and bolted. He experienced
a distinct feeling of relief. At any rate, it seemed to prove that
neither his companions nor any of the Mexicans had been injured. And
now he was forced to think of his own plight. Without a horse, and
separated from the others, what was to be done?

“First of all see if I can put out that fire,” he decided.

One look inside the building, however, showed him the futility of any
attempt to fight the rapidly increasing flames. On the lower floor
every piece of woodwork seemed to be ablaze. Red tongues of flames
crackled and sputtered--the smoke constantly rolled forth in greater
volumes.

“It’s a goner!” gasped Cranny. “Hello!” His ears had just caught the
sound of steadily marching feet, mixed in with a musical jingle. He
looked down the street, to see a long line of Federal soldiers and
several pack-trains of mules, drawing machine guns and ammunition,
passing an intersection.

Cries of “Viva Mexico!” shouted in rough, bawling voices, distracted
Cranny’s attention for the moment from the peril of his situation. Here
and there in the distance people were again daring to venture forth
into the streets, though a hail of bullets occasionally smashed against
the buildings, and the reports of bursting shells still sounded at
intervals.

“Whew! It’s certainly a big risk, stayin’ here!” muttered Cranny.
“What an awful shame I’ve lost my horse!” He looked anxiously about,
hoping to see some signs of his companions. “An’ certainly some risk
goin’ away. If I did, they’d sure get back the very next minute--Julius
Cæsar! I don’t understand what can be keepin’ ’em!”

But for the distant roar of the Federal and Constitutionalists’
artillery, and the steady popping of rifles, an unnatural quietness
seemed to hover about. Pacing in front of the big cottonwoods, he often
gazed at the burning building across the way. The street was filled
with a thick yellowish smoke and showers of sparks fell about him. An
adjoining shed caught fire.

It seemed very strange to be witnessing a fire with no effort made to
fight it.

“What a great country,” he mused. “I wonder how the scrap’s goin’?
The rebs certainly won’t have any picnic capturin’ this old town. By
George! I’d like to steal out to the firin’ lines--yes, sir--an’, but
for us, I guess Ralph Edmunds would have been there long ago.”

The sound of the firing became more desultory now. It began to look as
though the revolutionary forces might be beaten back, and the ring of
steel encircling the town broken and scattered to the surrounding hills.

Cranny found it increasingly difficult to control his impatience. To
remain inactive any longer was torture to him. He scorned the thought
of crossing the International bridge without first learning what had
become of his companions and Jimmy Raymond.

“I’ll be as game as Ralph Edmunds ever was,” he muttered, with the
old flashing light returning to his eyes. “Besides from now on I’ll
need every bit of that kind of stuff I’ve got.” He grinned. “Maybe the
fellows won’t be----”

Two sounds reaching his ears almost simultaneously broke the rest of
the sentence off with a jerk. One was the report of an exploding
shell, dangerously near, the other the faint clatter of horses,
evidently tearing along at a furious speed.

“By Jove! I really believe they’re comin’ back at last!” shouted
the Tacoma lad joyously. “Whoop! Oh! if it’s only so--anyway--it’s
certainly somebody, who wants to get somewhere else in a few ticks of
the clock.”

The street close at hand was now beginning to show some signs of
life again. The burning building proved an attraction which brought
a number of men running toward the scene, and Cranny once more heard
a loud jargon of Spanish. He saw some of the people as they pattered
up dividing their attention between him and the fire; though he was
perfectly indifferent to their stares, for the clatter of the galloping
horses was momentarily rising higher.

“There they come!” The lad excitedly spoke his thoughts aloud.

Far ahead around a bend two riders, enveloped in the soft haze of the
early morning, had suddenly appeared into view. At first glance it
looked as if their horses were beyond control, for neck to neck the
animals raced, while the riders sat astride their backs with all the
ease of Mexican vaqueros.

But the anxious Cranny Beaumont, his nerves tingling with expectancy
and hope, quickly perceived that the horsemen were neither Mexican
vaqueros, nor any of the riders who had so recently disappeared.

“Great Julius Cæsar!” he burst out explosively. With eyes fairly
bulging, he watched the Mexicans scattering to let the horsemen
pass. He heard a few shouts of “Gringo! Gringo!” Then a wave of wild
exultation swept through him. In the exuberance of his joy he tossed
his wide-brimmed sombrero high in the air and caught it as it fell.

“Whoop! whoop!” he yelled. “Go it, Tom! Go it! Show ‘Whirly-gig’ your
heels! This is a bit of luck, sure enough! Great Scott! I’m more glad’n
ever to be alive!”

Amidst a whirling cloud of yellow dust Bob Somers and Tom Clifton
pulled up their panting, steaming mustangs, to gaze, with expressions
of the utmost surprise, at the highly delighted Tacoma lad.




CHAPTER XXI

THE FUSILLADE


Bob Somers was the first of the Ramblers to speak.

“Good-morning, Cranny,” he exclaimed, in as even a tone as the terrific
jolting he had received would allow. “I never was more pleased to see
anybody in my life. We’ve come to get Jimmy Raymond!”

“But, goodness gracious, what are you doing out here all alone, Cranny
Beaumont?” demanded Tom, whose voice was trembling with suppressed
excitement. “Where’s your mustang? Where’s the crowd? Is Jimmy Raymond
inside that hotel?”

Tom spoke so rapidly that some of his words were all jumbled together,
a fact which was explained an instant later, when he burst out before
Cranny had had a chance to reply, “Did you hear a shell explode just
now? Well--a little bit more and it would have knocked thunder out of
Bob and me!”

“Life in Mexico is certainly one thrill after another!” gasped Cranny.
“But how in the world did you chaps happen along just in the nick of
time?”

“I reckon the whole bunch’ll be nicked in no time at all, unless
we manage to put the Rio between us and this land of fireworks and
smoke!” exclaimed Tom, with a glance at the burning house. “Now, Cranny
Beaumont----”

“Order, order!” interjected Bob. “We haven’t a moment to spare. Your
story’s the most important, Cranny. Fire away--make it short!”

It was no time or place for an extended conversation. With the sound of
rifles and cannons ringing in their ears, and surrounded by a crowd of
disheveled-looking Mexicans, in whose faces seemed to be reflected all
the angry, fierce passions of the moment, Cranny briefly related his
tale.

Anxious looks immediately sprang into the Ramblers’ faces.

“By George! It looks bad!” cried Tom.

Bob nodded.

“I don’t like it a little bit!” he acknowledged.

“It means that we’ll have to chase ’em up,” declared Tom vigorously.

“An’ come back here, every now an’ again!” asserted Cranny.

“Yes!” Then Tom, in answer to Cranny’s pleading to know something about
their own experiences, began to explain, in quick, jerky sentences.

The mustangs, restive and excited, pawing the ground, and
continually trying to dash away, made talking extremely difficult;
but notwithstanding this, Cranny quickly learned all the principal
features. Tom told him about the history of Jimmy Raymond, how he had
met Colonel Brookes Sylvester, and his subsequent trip over the prairie
to the Rangers’ quarters, where he found Bob Somers and the others all
“worked-up” over his long absence.

Then he had borrowed a fresh horse from Fred Cole, and in company with
Bob set out for the town across the river. Arriving there rather late
in the evening, the two had put up at company headquarters of the
Rangers, intending to start off the first thing in the morning after
Jimmy Raymond and bring him back to Texas.

“Of course he never expected there’d be any such fierce mix-up as
this,” exclaimed Tom, “or, at least, not so soon. The sound of the
firing awakened us--and say--maybe Bob and I didn’t hustle!”

“Then what made you so long in gettin’ here?” asked Cranny.

“Soldiers guarding the International bridge,” responded Tom. “And if it
hadn’t been for Captain Julius Braddock, who came that far with us, it
would have been a case of swim or wade across the river at some point
where there were no officials to stop us!”

All this information was packed into a surprisingly short space of
time. The fear of exploding shells was in the hearts of all. They could
see the smoke of fires at widely separated points in the town rising
high above the housetops.

“Jump up behind me, Cranny,” cried Tom breathlessly. “We’ve got some
mighty dangerous work before us!”

“You bet!” exclaimed Cranny. “Here I come, Tom! Look out, old chap!”

With a quick, agile spring he landed safely on the horse’s back, and
on the instant the jabbering, rather hostile-looking Mexicans saw the
riders head for the plaza at a rattling pace.

Swinging across it, they turned into a narrow, winding street which ran
to the west, keeping a sharp lookout for the other Americans.

“Colonel Sylvester certainly would be wild if he knew that Jimmy
couldn’t be found,” exclaimed Tom, as he and Bob drew up and halted in
the shadow of an old stone wall. “This seems to be one of the cases
where a chap can’t follow out any regular plan--it’s just hit or miss!”

“An’ I hope they do miss us,” said Cranny, with the trace of a chuckle
in his tone.

“I can’t understand why some of those chaps at least didn’t ride back
to the hotel as fast as they knew how,” remarked Bob. “Something must
have surely happened.”

“I’m afraid so!” said Tom. “Hello----”

Sharpshooters, from behind a high barricade of sand-bags on the roof
of a near-by building, had suddenly opened fire.

“I wonder if it means that the Constitutionalists are gettin’ nearer?”
cried Bob.

“I hardly think so,” declared Cranny. “Seems to me the firin’s been
growin’ less for some time.” He looked around at the little knots of
people, gathered together at various points. “These chaps appear to
have lost some o’ their panicky feelin’s.”

“Well! What shall we do?” demanded Tom.

“Keep on riding until the town is scoured from end to end!” replied
Bob. A sudden thought struck him. “Perhaps, for some reason, they’ve
all gone over the International bridge!”

“Not on your life!” scoffed Cranny. “Three of ’em were goin’ to stay
here even if the rebs blew the town from under ’em! I don’t know about
Jimmy, though,” he added reflectively.

This time Tom shook his head.

“No; I believe it would take more than this to make him beat it over to
that Texas town!” he said, emphatically.

Riding from street to street the boys saw on all sides small armies of
citizen volunteers and mounted rurales, every one of them armed.

These warlike scenes, the uncertainty, the lack of any knowledge either
concerning their companions or as to how the battle was progressing,
and the loud yells often directed toward them in Spanish, all combined
to keep them in a perpetual state of excitement.

“Oh, if I only hadn’t lost my way!” groaned Cranny. “How much better
I’d feel!”

And now they began to see many squads of Federal soldiers pattering
along, again accompanied by pack-trains of mules. Machine guns were set
up in the streets at many strategic points--it was very evident that
the lull in the enemies’ fire had not caused the Federals to abandon
any precautions.

At this time the cracking of rifles from behind the trenches and
breastworks had dwindled until now only an occasional sharp volley of
shots rang out.

When the history of this siege was written later, it then became known
that the Constitutionalists’ generals withdrew their forces while
awaiting the arrival of cars loaded with artillery. These were delayed
for a considerable time owing to the fact that a Federal scouting party
had torn up a portion of the railroad tracks.

Human judgment is fallible. Thus it was that the boys as well as many
of the citizens, in not understanding the true state of affairs,
exposed themselves to the greatest danger.

In searching for their friends the three finally found themselves
approaching the outskirts of the town. About three hundred yards beyond
the last houses, the zigzag trenches began.

As Cranny Beaumont caught sight of these deep pits, in which could
be seen the heads and shoulders of hundreds of Federal troops, their
shining rifles in a bristling array resting over the edge, he reflected
with a curious thrill that they were actually on the firing line, close
to field and machine guns, with the gunners standing ready to send a
hail of shot and shell spurting forth at the word of command. To the
left a long line of breastworks extended off, and behind these the
soldiers lounged about with apparently as much indifference as though
their work was the least hazardous occupation in the world.

The boys observed all these things, and were themselves observed by
hundreds and hundreds of swarthy Mexicans.

A group of men, evidently officers, poured forth a flood of Spanish,
and energetically waved for them to retire. The general in command of
the garrison, a fine military-looking figure, gaily uniformed, and
mounted on a coal black horse, spoke to an aide, who promptly began
riding toward them.

But he did not reach their side.

With an abruptness that caused the boys fairly to gasp with dismay, a
terrific cannonading started up from the direction of the hills. And,
at the same instant, thousands of cavalrymen, surrounding the town,
advanced far enough to open a heavy rifle fire on the breastworks and
trenches.

The attack was so violent and unexpected that the three for a few
seconds felt too bewildered to make any attempt to flee from the scene.

The Federal cannon began to boom with reports which seemed to jar them
from toes to the crown of their heads. The steady din of crackling
rifles and the crash of bursting shells dropping near the trenches and
breastworks speedily worked the mustangs into a frenzy of fear. But for
Cranny Beaumont’s great strength and acrobatic ability he would have
been flung from his seat when Tom’s horse suddenly bolted.

Bob Somers, after a moment’s inaction, had fully recovered his presence
of mind.

“Get behind the house over yonder, Tom!” he yelled.

Tom Clifton heeded his words. Riding at a furious pace, they dashed up
to a white adobe casa, which stood in a neglected field, overrun with
mesquite, and sought temporary shelter at the rear.

Breathless and fighting desperately to control their mounts, the lads
passed through some thrilling moments. Clouds of whitish smoke from
the cannons and rifles floated over the trenches. Little puffs of the
same color, rising straight up in the air, spotted the distant hills.
Showers of earth, dust, and fragments of bushes were continually
marking the places where shells had fallen.

All these things and more the three lads observed when they had
mastered the horses, and dared to peer cautiously around the
weather-beaten walls.

“Well now, fellows, we seem to be in the fix of our lives!” exclaimed
Cranny. He did his best to control a vibrating note in his voice. “The
other bombardment was just a joke to this!”

“You were right after all about the sleeping volcano stuff, Cranny!”
remarked Tom, solemnly. “Only this is a lot worse.”

A rain of shells was carrying terror and destruction to the town. The
smoke of numerous fires rolled up in whirling columns against the clear
blue sky.

A handful of bullets, suddenly striking the wall on the opposite side
of the house, and others, tearing and ripping through the foliage of a
tree close by, sending branches and twigs to the ground, gave the lads
a terrible start.

“It won’t be safe to stay here much longer!” breathed Tom.

“I say let’s steer straight for our hotel on the plaza,” said Bob.
“Possibly we may run across some of the fellows in that direction.”

The lads were afraid to remain in their present position, yet equally
afraid to leave its shelter. Shells were passing overhead. One expended
its force in a field not far beyond, with a tremendous outburst.

The rapidity with which events were moving, however, decided matters
for them.

Scarcely daring now to look around the corner of the house, they
finally did so, when a curious cessation of the Federal batteries and
rifle firing occurred.

And the sight which their eyes took in was enough to make even a
seasoned special war correspondent like Ralph Edmunds tremble with
apprehension and alarm.

The cordon of cavalrymen, thousands in numbers, were making a furious,
headlong charge. It was a magnificent, and an inspiring sight as
well, to see that great body of horsemen in the bright clear sunshine
galloping forward.

“Look! look at the Feds scramblin’ out o’ the trenches!” yelled Cranny,
wildly. “They’re done for--it’s good-night for them.”

Squads of soldiers and citizen volunteers were already rushing up to
reinforce their comrades. From the sharpshooters on the roof tops came
volley after volley; but nothing which lay in their power could have
stemmed that daring charge.

In the grip of a fascination that held them motionless, the three
watched and waited in breathless suspense.

Now the cavalrymen were charging the outermost line of trenches and
the breastworks to the south. Over the deep, zigzag pits their horses
were leaping, floundering or struggling; some there were that stumbled
and fell, and unaided could not rise again. And all this time the wild
fierce yells, as foe met foe, could be clearly heard.

Resistless as an avalanche the great multitude swept on, while a
continuous stream of brown-skinned men came pouring and tumbling out
of the trenches, and, as panic-stricken as animals fleeing before the
flames and smoke of a forest fire, dashed madly off for any haven of
safety.

Soldiers with loaded guns forgot to fire. Many discarded their weapons
as they ran. It was a spectacle of triumph on the one hand and utter
demoralization on the other. The sudden and desperate nature of the
assault crumpled up the Federals, and the great onrushing tide of men
and horses threatened to engulf and overwhelm many of those who fled
before them.

The very danger of the situation seemed to give the lads an almost
unnatural calmness. They fully understood that to remain an instant
longer was to run the greatest risk. In those terrible moments of
turmoil and violence, nationality would not serve to protect them.

“To the hotel, boys!” shouted Bob. “And then----”

“What?” asked Tom, in solemn tones.

“That’s something we have yet to learn!”

As they started off, finding it difficult to hold the frightened,
snorting mustangs in check, a small army of mounted rurales and citizen
volunteers were seen advancing on a trot. A few shots sent them
scurrying to cover. Then from behind the shelter of isolated houses
they began to pour forth an answering fire.

The clatter of pounding hoofs as the cavalrymen galloped furiously over
the roads and across the fields, the savage yells of the combatants,
and the sharp cracking of rifles, made a veritable pandemonium of sound.

Following the first hot clash with the citizen defenders, riderless
horses and pack-trains of mules were stampeding through the hot, dusty
streets, adding to the panic and terror of the fleeing people.

Bending every effort to keep far in the lead of the victorious host of
charging cavalrymen, the boys rode hard. They felt neither the heat nor
the perspiration streaming down their dust-begrimed faces. No shells
were falling now on the town, but the farther they progressed the more
menacing the danger became.

Several of the narrow streets were still occupied by little groups
of Federal soldiers, who, rounded up by their officers and bullied,
threatened or coaxed, were prepared to make a last desperate stand.

Blocked from these thoroughfares the Americans clattered headlong into
others, always in the thick of so many thrilling events, in which
panic, passion, and violence played equal parts, that their brains
could grasp only a confused and jumbled impression.

At the rear, urging them on, ever faster, faster was the sound of
strife as the cavalrymen, smashing and crushing all opposition that lay
in their path, continued their triumphal advance.

And above the general hullabaloo made by shots, the hoofs of dashing
horses, and human voices raised to a pitch of frenzy, came the reports
of dynamite bombs exploding with fearful force. This was the work of
the Federals, who had threatened to destroy the town, if forced to
evacuate.

Through the thick yellow smoke from burning buildings, with sputtering
sparks like a hail of fire dropping about them, rode the lads, making
desperate efforts to reach the plaza in the shortest possible time.

They had so many times almost given up hope of ever reaching it, that
when the broad and almost deserted square, simmering in the rays of the
blazing sun, actually did appear before their eyes, Cranny blurted out
almost hilariously:

“Say, fellows! That’s certainly one o’ the finest sights I’ve ever
seen!”

“I’ll never forget it!” said Bob, in a strained, tense voice.

Without having any definite plan other than to get a few moments’ rest,
the three urged the mustangs toward the stable.

The revolutionists they knew would be swarming through every part of
the town in a very short time. What sort of treatment could they expect
to receive at their hands?

In their present state of mind, with the fate of the others still
unknown, not one of the three could have brought himself to offer, as a
solution to their own difficulties, a flight across the International
bridge.

Dismounting before the stable door, they quickly led the mustangs
inside.

“Hello!” exclaimed Tom, the moment his eyes had become accustomed to
the gloomy shadows. “Do you see anything queer?”

“No, I don’t see anythin’ queer!” responded Cranny. “An’ why? Because
it’s gone.”

“Which seems to prove that George Parry must have come here and taken
the burro away,” said Bob.

“Of course that’s it!” cried the Tacoma lad, joyously.

“That makes me feel a great deal better!”

“I don’t understand it,” murmured Tom.

“It certainly looks mighty encouraging anyway!” cried Bob. “Get over
there, ‘Whirly-gig’--steady, boy--let’s head for the cool shadows of
the patio, fellows, and talk it over.”

When the ponies were secured to the iron rings the three made a rapid
sprint for the hotel. On the topmost step they paused.

“Ah!” murmured Cranny.

On a street in line with them, leading off from the plaza, they saw
a large body of cavalrymen, a jam of horses and men in the narrow
confines, bearing rapidly down on the sun-baked square.

“I can’t help it,” growled Tom, wiping beads of perspiration from his
face. “I’m going to have a rest!” He walked inside with the others
following at his heels.

“We’ll have to trust to luck, and----” Bob Somers had just come in
sight of the patio when he uttered these words, but instead of
finishing the sentence he stopped abruptly, to gasp out an exclamation
of the utmost astonishment.

His companions, too, uttered similar sounds.

Two boys resting in the shade of the courtyard had hastily risen to
their feet at the sound of their entrance, and turned to face them.

“By all that’s wonderful! Dick Travers and Jimmy Raymond!” shouted Tom
Clifton.




CHAPTER XXII

KIDNAPPING JIMMY


“Good gracious!” cried Dick, wildly. “Bob Somers and Tom Clifton!
Well--well--it can’t be true--how in thunder----”

“Isn’t this just about the finest thing that ever happened!” broke in
Jimmy, his face radiant with joy. “Why! I thought two of you chaps were
miles and miles away!”

The boys were so highly delighted at this happy reunion, under strange
and dramatic circumstances, that the dangers which surrounded them were
for the moment forgotten.

“Well! Jimmy Raymond, you certainly are responsible for making us face
the music!” cried Tom.

“Well, Dick Travers, you certainly helped to make me see some sights!”
gurgled Cranny, with his old-time reckless air.

“I want to know an awful lot of things,” exclaimed Dick. “How in the
world you chaps got back here so soon and---- Say, Bob--how’s the
scrap going? I’ve just been simply wild to know--for goodness’ sake
talk fast.”

It was Bob Somers, as usual, who brought order into the proceedings. He
knew that there would be no safety for them so long as they remained on
this side of the border.

“The Constitutionalists have captured the town!” he responded
hurriedly. “But really, Dick, there isn’t a bit of time for any other
explanations just now!”

“I should say not!” chimed in Tom. Eager as the lad felt to learn about
the experiences of Dick and Jimmy, he could not forget that the mission
entrusted to him by Colonel Brookes Sylvester should be carried out
before anything else was thought of.

Excitement was in the air. Every sound from the outside seemed to
possess an ominous note that thrilled. In their fidgety movements, and
their voices, which in spite of the most earnest efforts persisted in
vibrating, the lads showed the effects of it all.

“I’ve got the finest bit of news for you, Jimmy!” exclaimed Tom. “I’ve
met your uncle, Colonel Brookes Sylvester, and----” He stopped short,
struck by a peculiar expression which sprang into the young pianist’s
eyes. “Why--what’s the matter?”

“You met my uncle!” exclaimed Jimmy. “How--when?”

In a very few words the Rambler explained, and when he had finished
both he and three others were astounded.

Jimmy, his face set and stern, was pacing up and down.

“I’m not going back to Texas--at least not just now!” he blurted out
with savage earnestness.

“Not going back to Texas!” echoed Tom, in amazement. “I--I don’t
understand.”

“I’ll make you! Oh, it’s all very well to try and smooth things
over with soft palaver.” Jimmy the pianist was working himself into
a passion. He spoke rapidly, snapping out his sentences in a jerky
fashion. “The colonel notified the police, the Texas Rangers, and every
one else in authority to arrest me. To arrest me--did you hear?” The
last words came out like a shout.

“You--you don’t understand, Jimmy!” cried Tom.

Jimmy paid no attention.

“And then he said,” the remembrance increased the scowling lines on his
forehead, “that he didn’t think I was of the rough and ready sort who
could fight his own battles in the world!”

“But, Jimmy, suppose he did. That’s nothing!”

“Not to you, maybe, Tom! My uncle ordered me to return to Brownsville
as though I were but a little kid. He said enough in five minutes to
make me mad for five years!”

“It’s all a whopping big mistake!” protested Tom energetically. “Let me
tell you----”

“Dick,” the pianist’s hand came down on the Rambler’s shoulder,
“couldn’t understand why I refused to skip over to Texas with him; now
he knows!”

Jimmy’s sensitive nature had been far more deeply touched than even his
uncle had dreamed. He vehemently protested that he did not intend to
be arrested by the Texas Rangers or any one else; that he would prove
to Colonel Brookes Sylvester’s entire satisfaction his ability to get
along in the world.

[Illustration: SILENTLY THE LADS OBSERVED THEM]

“I’ll admit in the past I’ve been too much a hothouse kid, but,” he
banged his fist down hard on a table by his side, “never again! No,
Tom! I won’t cross over the International bridge with you! Besides, I
believe the danger’s all over!”

“‘A hothouse kid,’” cried Dick. “Why--say, fellows, this chap is simply
chuck full of grit. He didn’t even want to skip down into the cyclone
cellar when shells were bursting all around the plaza. And----”

Heavy footsteps on the veranda, and resounding deep, bass voices,
brought the explanations and arguments to an abrupt conclusion. They
grew momentarily louder and on looking toward the door leading into the
building the boys saw half a dozen burly Mexicans soon emerge from the
soft, mellow depths of the interior into the bluish gray tones of the
shade outside.

“Christopher Columbus!” murmured Dick.

They, themselves, were partly concealed from view behind several
towering shrubs, and the newcomers failed to discover their presence.
Silently the lads observed them. Their hearts beat faster. Crouching
far back into the friendly shelter they watched and waited, while the
swarthy-looking men strode here and there, their spurs clinking faintly
as they walked.

They were all in a high good humor, rough and boisterous; and in a
playful spirit overturned tables, upset plants, and flipped with their
quirts any stray glasses or crockery-ware which came in their way,
chuckling loudly when the patio echoed to the sounds of smashing glass.

After five minutes of silence and suspense on the boys’ part, the
revolutionists strode back into the building and disappeared.

During all this time Tom Clifton had been doing a tremendous amount of
thinking. Jimmy, he realized, after long pondering over his imaginary
wrongs, had worked himself into such a state of mind that at the
present time he was no longer amenable to reason. It seemed to have the
effect, too, of dulling his senses to the perils which still surrounded
them.

Anarchy, lawlessness, disregard for either the lives or property of
people, characterized that period of the troublous times in Mexico. If
the pianist could not be induced to return to Texas by arguments, he
must be made to do so by other means.

“Of course,” murmured Tom, “he’ll be furiously angry for a short time.
Then say it was the best thing that ever happened to him.”

The moment the Constitutionalists’ footsteps had ceased to sound he was
whispering a plan to Bob. The Rambler chief nodded.

“Bully for you, Tom,” he replied in equally low tones. “We’ll do it!”

“Dick,” exclaimed Tom, suddenly, “do you think the other chaps are all
right?”

“Yes!” responded Dick. “I’ll tell you now----”

“It’s a jolly fine thing to feel that way,” interjected Bob, earnestly.
He lowered his voice. “But we don’t want to do any more talking just
now!”

Wonderingly, Jimmy Raymond followed them as they cautiously started
for the doorway. A little reconnoitering showed that the interior was
deserted.

The broad, sunny plaza presented an entirely different scene from any
which had before greeted their eyes. It wore all the appearance of an
armed camp. Stacked rifles were gleaming in the light. Cavalry horses
hitched singly and in groups occupied almost every available place.
Booted and spurred revolutionists, with cartridge belts worn about
their waists or slung across their shoulders, filled the square. It was
an ever-moving throng, which sent up a ceaseless jabbering of talk, of
shouts and yells, while the pigeons fluttered about the belfry of the
ancient church and dared not to venture down in their familiar haunts
below.

“Poor chaps!” exclaimed Dick, in low tones. His eyes were following a
squad of Federal soldiers--prisoners, being escorted by armed guards
across the square. “This is no place for us!” he added.

“Let’s steer straight for the American Consul,” suggested Jimmy. “I
know the house--that’s one of the jobs he gets paid for--protecting
United States subjects.”

“On to the stable!” said Cranny, softly.

With many a fear tugging at their hearts, the five stole down the
veranda steps expecting to hear challenging cries hurled toward
them at any moment. Good luck, however, attended their efforts, and
each slipped inside the stable door with a muttered expression of
satisfaction.

“Can you ride, Jimmy?” asked Tom.

“I certainly can!” answered the pianist.

“That’s bully! You jump up behind me. Cranny’ll go with Dick. For
goodness’ sakes, fellows, don’t let’s get separated again--whew, some
hot day this all around, eh?”

“Oh! if young ‘Starlight’ were only here!” growled the Tacoma lad.

Bob Somers held a brief consultation in a guarded tone with Dick and
Cranny. Their eyes opened wider. “Sure thing, Bob! We understand,”
whispered the Rambler.

“Now!” exclaimed Tom, in a stern, authoritative voice. “I’m going in
the lead. Keep close behind me, and,” he shook his finger emphatically,
“don’t question any direction I may take!”

“All right!” said Jimmy.

“I guess we won’t go many blocks!” murmured Cranny.

Tom poked his head outside the door, after a quick glance around,
exclaiming: “Come on, fellows; lead ’em right to the rear. Ready? No
noise now!”

It was a job that made their nerves tingle anew, for a number of men
were sprawling in the shade not so very far away.

The crowd managed it, however. Tom was the first to spring into the
saddle.

“Come along, Jimmy!” he exclaimed, with a long, deep breath. The young
pianist without an instant’s hesitation jumped up behind him.

“Let ’er go, Tom,” he said. “Yes, don’t bother. I’ll hold on tight!”

At the head of the little procession Tom started off, turning into the
first street at the rear of the hotel. Very few of the inhabitants of
the town were to be seen, but their eyes could not roam far in any
direction without taking in some of the victorious cavalrymen.

Riding at a cautious pace and carefully choosing the side streets,
many of which were practically deserted, they were soon a considerable
distance from the hotel.

Had there been less excitement and confusion it is almost certain that
the victorious Constitutionalists would have quickly stopped them and
demanded explanations. But the soldiers, flushed with victory, were too
busy searching for the richest spoils to concern themselves very much
with a handful of passing horsemen.

True it was that many a pair of fierce, questioning eyes was turned
upon them, and the five felt their hearts beat fast when a galloping
horse was pulled up with a jerk, and its rider addressed them in a
rough, loud voice.

“Buenas dias, señor,” said Bob, politely. “Buenas dias, señor,” said
the others with equal gravity. The man, for a moment, looked at them
with a puzzled expression, then muttering to himself continued on his
way.

Becoming bolder by degrees, they clattered along at a good rate,
past the still smoking ruins of the Municipal Palace, by the side
of a row of buildings on Commerco Street, of which only the jagged,
smoke-begrimed walls remained. Débris filled the streets, telegraph
poles lay across their path, wires were strewn about, and broken and
scarred walls gave evidence of the terrific violence of the artillery
fire.

“See here, Tom, I don’t believe you’re going in the right direction!”
exclaimed Jimmy at last.

The Rambler made no reply, for the threatening actions of four armed
Mexicans standing in front of the iron railings which surrounded the
handsome library had attracted his attention. The building, a wreck
from the effects of shot, shell and fire, was now but a gaunt reminder
of its former stateliness.

Jimmy was thinking of this when Tom suddenly looked over his shoulder
and addressing the riders close behind, exclaimed:

“Now, fellows! Look out!”

The four Mexicans were running fast toward them; just as each began to
utter a voluble string of words, Tom gave his mustang a touch of the
quirt and swung into another street, soon leaving the men far to the
rear.

Then, casting aside the last vestige of caution, the Rambler gradually
increased his pace until the hoofs of the horses were sending abroad a
loud warning of their presence.

Jimmy was amazed.

“Stop! Hold on, Tom!” he yelled. “Now I know you’re going in the wrong
direction. Hold on, I say!”

He turned his head. With a swift glance the lad saw Bob Somers and Dick
Travers thundering along on either hand, their faces tense and stern.

“Bob, he’s taking us half the town’s length out of our way!” he
shouted. “Stop him!”

“Get up, old boy, git up!” in Tom’s loud, gruff voice were the only
words he heard in response. Whereupon a sudden suspicion entered the
young pianist’s mind. Just ahead he caught a glimpse of the Rio Grande,
and a pile of grim old buildings which lined its bank. But a short
distance from them, the International bridge crossed the river.

When his next loud commands received no answer, Jimmy realized with
a feeling of the deepest anger that his surmises had proven to be
correct. He began to storm, to coax and even to threaten.

“It’s all right, Jimmy!” yelled Bob. “It was the only thing we could
do!”

A hot breeze blew in the lads’ faces. Dogs barked, or dashed out to
snap at the ponies’ heels; people stared in wonderment. On and on they
thundered, at an ever-increasing pace, until the white adobe houses,
the stuccoed walls, the fields and trees seemed to blend together into
a continuous streak of varied color.

Jimmy, a captive in the hands of the boys he had liked so well, still
stormed and growled. He was helpless, however, to interfere in the
slightest degree with the course of events.

Now sweeping into the wide road which followed the bank of the Rio, the
lads saw but a short distance ahead the International bridge. It was a
wooden structure, heavy and crude in appearance, little suggesting its
impressive title.

At any other time the horsemen would not have been allowed to cross in
so unceremonious a fashion; but apparently all the officials whose duty
it was to look after outgoing and incoming travelers had fled from the
scene.

Only a few cavalrymen were about, and they were too far from the
entrance to give the boys any concern.

As his horse clattered out on the planks, Tom Clifton could not
restrain a loud cry of exultation. Jimmy now would soon realize the
wisdom of their actions and the folly of his own.

The clouds of choking dust still kept pace with them; a thunderous din
of dashing horses was carried off on the still, hot atmosphere.

It was heard by United States soldiers guarding the American side; it
also reached the ears of two members of the Texas Rangers on duty for
the time being at the same important post.

These men eagerly watched the approaching riders, who with the hot sun
beating relentlessly down upon them tore at unslackened speed over the
last stretch of the journey.

Presently the lads, enveloped in the center of a cloud of whirling
dust, pulled up and sprang to the ground--safe on United States soil.

They were immediately surrounded by soldiers, Rangers, and inhabitants,
and from every side a torrent of questions rang in their ears.

One of the Texas Rangers, with a sharp, quick glance toward Jimmy
Raymond, took no part in the talking, nor did he seem to pay any heed
to the replies which the fugitives were rattling off as fast as their
weary condition would permit.

The officer stood scanning a headquarters order; then, nodding his head
affirmatively, he stepped forward and laid a hand on the Texas boy’s
shoulder.

“Son!” he exclaimed quietly. “You’re wanted!”

At last Jimmy Raymond, the young pianist, was in the hands of the Texas
Rangers, the men whom he had so ardently wished to avoid.




CHAPTER XXIII

SAFE AGAIN IN TEXAS


It was too much for the lad to stand philosophically. The nerve-racking
events through which he had recently passed; the unexpected dash for
the American side; the bitter feelings of resentment and of anger
stirred up by the course the others had taken made his passions for the
instant beyond control.

He flung aside the officer’s hand, and with blazing eyes faced Tom
Clifton.

“You did this!” he shouted. “And you had no right to----” Words alone
could not satisfy him; he sprang toward the Rambler with clenched fists
and shoulders squared.

Tom, aghast, stepped hastily back. The circle of surprised humanity
which instantly formed, hedging the two closely about, saw a curious
spectacle. The lads, both of extreme height, were in violent action.
Jimmy’s move had been so quickly made, so unlooked for, that before
any one could lay a restraining hand upon him the struggle had begun.

On Tom Clifton’s part it was merely an effort to keep away. Not a spark
of anger shone in his eyes. Quick, agile, he easily evaded Jimmy’s
rushes and presently the Texas Rangers dragged the excited young
pianist aside.

A surging, noisy crowd now hemmed them all in. Their curiosity was
insatiable, not only in regard to the event which had just taken place,
but to the other and greater battle fought on the opposite side of the
Rio.

“For goodness’ sake, let’s get away from here fast!” exclaimed Dick. He
turned to the Rangers and speaking in a low tone, told them that they
were bound for the company headquarters of the force.

“We’ve seen you over there,” said one, with a huge grin. “An’ Carl
Alvin’s never done talkin’ about ye. I’m sorry, son.” He slapped Jimmy
on the shoulder. “We’re only followin’ out our orders, you know.”

The pianist had already begun to regret his outburst. Like a flash he
recalled the pleasant time he had spent with the others; how they had
helped to cheer him, and make his self-imposed exile easier to bear.
And there was Tom, regarding him in the most friendly manner. Yet only
a moment before he had flung himself upon him with all his force.

In those seconds while the staring, gaping crowd waited, hoping for new
developments, he began to get a truer insight into his own character.
Dimly it dawned into his mind that his way was not the right way.

“Tom,” he said, simply, “here’s my hand!”

The Rambler accepted it. The crowd grinned and made some comments; the
horsemen smiling cheerfully mounted again.

Followed by the two Rangers they soon reached headquarters, and after
hitching their horses to the row of posts outside bounded up the steps,
Cranny in the lead.

“We’ve got him, cap’n!” he shouted to the astonished official, the
moment the big door had opened to let them pass. “Bring on the ball an’
chains--where’s the darkest dungeon?”

“Got whom?” queried Captain Braddock, hastily rising to his feet.

“Jimmy Raymond!”

The grizzled old commander of the Texas Rangers, a great friend of
Colonel Sylvester, was highly delighted at the news.

“Jimmy Raymond actually found at last,” he cried. “That’s splendid.
I must ’phone to the colonel at once. Who came across him and where?
Jimmy, my lad, step this way. I want to hear all about it! I’m
delighted!”

Tom Clifton’s impatience to learn all about Dick’s experiences in the
Mexican town made him urge every one to speak rapidly and to the point.
His commands were obeyed so successfully that within half an hour he
and the others were seated comfortably on a bench, ready to listen, as
were several interested Rangers, to the Rambler’s tale.

A great change had come over Jimmy Raymond’s face. The gracious, kindly
treatment he had received at the hands of Captain Braddock, and the
assurances received from him that he had been resting under a serious
misapprehension, chased away entirely the curiously discontented
expression, which had so often marred his looks.

“What an awful duffer I’ve been,” he reflected, “and would be still
but for these chaps. It certainly doesn’t pay to nurse a grievance!”
But Dick was speaking now. He began to listen with rapt attention.

“You see, it was this way!” said Dick. “When that awful explosion
happened,” he made an expressive gesture, “our ponies got just as
wild as any wild horses of the plains.” Then the lad rapidly sketched
the course of events. He told about the mad dash the horses had made;
how he had narrowly escaped being jerked from the saddle by Cranny
Beaumont’s horse; the wild race that followed, during which “Starlight”
succeeded in breaking away and was seen no more.

“An’ if I don’t ever get hold o’ him again, I’ll certainly be on my
uppers with a vengeance!” murmured Cranny.

Fortunately the party had managed to keep together, but in their
efforts to capture “Starlight” a great deal of time elapsed before they
rode back into the plaza again.

Passing the hotel every one was surprised and delighted to see Jimmy
Raymond standing on the veranda. While the party had gone in search
of him the lad was making his way to the hotel in order to find his
new-found friends.

“Oh! If you had only known!” murmured Tom, regretfully.

“However, when we saw Jimmy it all looked as though the finish of the
story had been written,” declared Dick.

“And how did the ‘to be continued’ part come in?” questioned Cranny
eagerly.

“Two whopping big policemen, seeing the bunch, sauntered up. I guess
they imagined the Constitutionalists’ attack would be easily repulsed.
Both of ’em began to fire a lot of questions at us. Then one suddenly
discovered a pocket camera in Edmunds’ coat. That settled it--we might
be spies for all they knew--several Americans had been caught doing
just that sort of work for the Constitutionalists--we couldn’t bluff
them!”

“Well, wasn’t that about the limit!” exclaimed Tom, indignantly.

“Ralph Edmunds, of course, talked right up to the men. It didn’t do a
bit of good, however; the bunch was ordered to proceed at once to the
police station.”

“I wouldn’t have gone!” cried Tom.

“Oh, yes you would, Tom! A chap doesn’t feel like arguing when a
revolver is flashing under his nose. The chief of police wasn’t a bad
sort of chap. He looked over Edmunds’ newspaper credentials, asked
Professor Kent and Parry a whole lot of questions, flung two or three
at us; then told the big cops they had made fools of themselves!”

“To cut it short the affair took up so much time that when he reached
Jimmy’s hotel again the bird had flown.”

“Cranny’s a bird all right,” grinned Jimmy.

“What was the next thing on the program?” queried Bob.

This question had the effect of making an uncomfortable, embarrassed
look come over the Texas lad’s face. He shifted uneasily on his seat
for a moment, then blurted out:

“Those three men had come to Mexico on business. Parry was wild to get
some moving pictures of a real bona-fide scrap, and Edmunds wanted to
absorb impressions, so he said, for a special article which he intended
to write with Cranny’s help later on. And,” he grinned, “their chief
anxiety was for me. Helpless little thing, eh?”

“You have as much grit as a provisional president o’ Mexico!” chirped
Cranny.

“Dick assured ’em that you were certainly able to look out for
yourself, Cranny; then I put in a word, and after a long confab all
three were finally persuaded to attend to the work which had brought
them to Mexico. They thought,” a rather sheepish grin this time
overspread his face, “that Dick and I would hike right across the
International bridge.”

Dick laughed merrily.

“I certainly met a big surprise, eh, Jimmy?” he said.

“The more said about that the worse!” declared the pianist, soberly.
“Now, boys, you’ve got the whole story. Have we seen the other bunch
since they left us? No, but you can just bet they are all right.”

“You’re correct there, old chap, I’m sure!” assented Bob.

A general discussion, in which the highly interested Rangers joined,
was interrupted by Captain Braddock.

“Come here, Jimmy, I have your uncle on the ’phone at last,” he cried.
“And by the way, Tom, I wish to speak to you a minute.”

While the Texas lad held a long distance conversation with Colonel
Brookes Sylvester at the “Eagle Pass” Ranch, Tom conferred with the
Ranger chief.

A few minutes later he rejoined the group, regarding them with quite a
stern and dignified air.

“The captain wants me to skip right off so that I can pilot Sergeant
Howell and a detail of Rangers over to the exact place where I came
across that fallen steer!” he explained. “Maybe there’s some more fun
ahead of us, eh, Cranny! We’ll chip in and hire a horse for you, old
chap!”

“Thanks, Tom,” said Cranny. “But even if I had ‘Starlight’ right here,”
he smiled, the old joyous smile the crowd knew so well, “I wouldn’t go
along!”

Tom looked at him in absolute amazement.

“Wouldn’t go along!” he gasped. “Say--where’s the joke, Cranny?”

“As the politician says, ‘I haven’t anythin’ to say at this time!’”

“But you surely don’t--can’t mean it!”

“I surely do, Tom, old boy!”

This time there could be no longer any room for doubt. Cranny’s tone,
the aggressive tilt of his jaw, the shrug of his shoulders, symptoms
which every one of the crowd knew denoted an iron determination to
stick to his resolution, were all in evidence.

Tom Clifton’s surprise was almost ludicrous in its intensity. This was
the first time in all the Ramblers’ experiences with Cranny Beaumont
that he hadn’t eagerly grasped at an opportunity of being a participant
in anything which promised adventure.

The Rambler looked at him narrowly. A dreadful suspicion flitted into
his mind. Had Cranny’s nerve been shaken by the stirring events in
Mexico? Could it be possible? Tom didn’t want to think so. Or perhaps
the scorching heat and hard ride had affected him. Yet, as he sat
there among the crowd, Cranny looked to be about as healthy a specimen
of a boy as could be found in the whole of the United States. No! it
evidently wasn’t that! Oh, yes; how stupid of him not to have thought
of it before! The Tacoma lad’s financial situation, the dread of
returning to his home and being forced to confess to his father that
he hadn’t made good, must be the cause! Well, it certainly did seem
pretty tough! And no doubt the loss of “Starlight” had struck the
finishing blow to Cranny’s dream of surprising the folks at home!

“Poor chap, I’m awful sorry we didn’t try to help him a bit more,”
soliloquized Tom. “The crowd must try to make up for it, and----” Why,
what was the matter? Hadn’t he struck it right this time, either? There
was Cranny slapping one of the Texas Rangers on the shoulder in the
exuberance of his mirth over some remark which had just been made.

“Well, I’ve got to give it up!” he pronounced to himself, helplessly.
“It’s the strangest thing I ever heard of!”

“What’s the matter, old chap?” asked Dick, suddenly. “See anything
particularly beautiful in that knot-hole in the floor you’ve been
gazing at for the last few moments?”

Tom recovered himself with a start.

“I--I was thinking about something,” he stammered.

“Take my advice, Tom, and don’t think too hard on any one subject!”
exclaimed Jimmy, who was just returning to the group. “Boys, my uncle
wants me to meet him at detachment headquarters of the Rangers this
afternoon--are you going to lead me to it?”

“Well, rather,” responded Bob.

“That’s bully!”

“Say, fellows,” broke in Cranny, “Edmunds told me an awful odd thing--I
wonder if you’ve ever noticed it?”

“We’re listening,” chortled Dick.

“He says I never pronounce the final g’s and d’s in words ending that
way.”

“I remarked it--that is, at times,” answered Dick cautiously.

“Say--has anybody else? Confess now!”

“If you insist upon it, we will,” laughed Bob. “’Tis true.”

“An’ I try so hard to be perfect,” gurgled Cranny. “Fellows, I’m goin’
to reform. Honest I am. Every time I don’t sound those final letters
just give me a punch!”

“No, that wouldn’t do at all!” protested Dick. “No tragedy in our crowd
if you please. Besides, you enjoy life too much!”

“Then s’pose instead that whenever I catch myself makin’ a slip I give
one of you chaps a punch as a reminder of----”

“Oh, dear me, no!” broke in Bob. “Tom, you know, doesn’t carry a whole
dispensary with him.”

“All right, fellows.” The Tacoma lad’s mirth increased. “I’ll do all
the reforming by my own strength of will! And----”

“Listen--listen! Did you hear it--the final g’s and d’s at last!” cried
Dick. “Hooray! Boys, what a day this has been!”

About two hours later Cranny, whose singular resolve to remain in town
held firm in spite of Tom’s pleadings, stood on the steps of the Ranger
headquarters and watched the boys preparing for departure. His face
just then wore a rather clouded expression.

“When will you chaps be back?” he asked.

“Before very many days,” answered Tom. He sighed. “Too bad, fellows,
our stay in Texas is almost over. Now, Cranny Beaumont, what are you
going to do while we’re away?”

“For one thing, try to square myself with that horse-dealer. And I’m
nearly busted as it is.”

“Too bad! What else, Cranny?”

“I’ll tell you later on, Tom. Honest, I’m not going to say another word
about it--but--oh, hang it all, how I’d like to go along with you!”

“Just do it!” pleaded Tom.

For a moment the Tacoma lad’s resolution seemed to waver, then, with a
shrug of his shoulders, he laughed, exclaiming:

“No, Tom. Nothing doing!”

“Cranny’s right on the job,” chuckled Dick. “The final g’s are in their
place--bravo, old chap!”

“If he won’t let the bunch help him out, I’ll be downright mad,”
murmured Tom.

This time Jimmy Raymond clambered up behind Bob Somers.

“Remember, boys!” he exclaimed jocularly. “No more racing to-day!”

Good-byes were shouted. The mustangs, well fed and freshly groomed,
trotted briskly off at the word of command. Frequently the riders
turned to look back, and, as long as the building remained in view,
they could see Cranny Beaumont vigorously waving his hand.

During the long route over the prairie, Bob Somers and Jimmy Raymond
became a great deal better acquainted with one another. Bob, the
recipient of many confidences, was enabled to give his companion words
of helpful advice.

The young pianist, after listening to his enthusiastic comments
regarding the law as a profession, began to see the matter in another
light.

“It’s a mistake to consider it dry,” declared Bob. “The law is full of
the most interesting and complex problems. Vital problems, too, for in
many cases they affect the well-being of the human race.”

“My experiences have done me a pile of good, Bob,” confessed Jimmy.
“Honestly, I never stopped to consider the hardships and dangers of
cowboy life. Looking back on it now, I can’t really understand what
ever possessed me to chuck away such good advice as my uncle gave. I
reckon some chaps can acquire wisdom only by having plenty of hard
knocks come their way.”

“What are your plans now, Jimmy?” asked Bob.

“I’m going right back to Brownsville and get hard to work at my studies
again. Yes, sir, you’ve set me straight on a whole lot of things, Bob.
If every chap could have put to him as clearly as you have put to me
the reason why he should make every effort to learn, I reckon there
wouldn’t be so many boys loafing about the streets.”

“Thanks,” laughed Bob. “One thing is certain; it makes the road through
life much easier, and the possibilities of eventually arriving at some
goal worth while far greater.”




CHAPTER XXIV

JIMMY GETS BACK


“Really, fellows, I’m beginning to feel as though I belonged to the
Ranger Force of Texas myself,” exclaimed Don Stratton.

Dave Brandon, lolling in the grass close by, nodded. “I have that
policeman feeling, too,” he drawled. “It’s becoming a settled habit
with me to be on the constant lookout for cattle rustlers and other
kinds of outlaws.”

“Same here,” declared Sam Randall, who was also reclining on the ground
in a position of the greatest ease. “Order on the prairie must be kept
at any cost. Say--it seems lonely without the Ranger bunch around, eh?”

“Yes,” said Dave, “we haven’t been on very many trips alone.”

Some hours earlier, the three lads had left the Ranger encampment for
a ride across the prairie. The day was hot and in the field of deep
blue sky a few long strips of hazy clouds seemed to be resting almost
motionless.

Discovering a thick growth of timber which bordered a narrow, twisting
stream, the boys had headed for it and dismounting in the shadowy
depths tethered their mustangs. Then, lured on by the musical tinkle of
running water, they had penetrated still deeper into the dense brake,
finally reaching the shelving shore of the creek.

It was a delightfully cool and pleasant retreat after the heat and
glare of the open prairie, and when their thirst was quenched with
the clear, cool water, the lads found a little open space that, Dave
declared, seemed to fairly invite them to seek repose.

Between the leafy masses overhead came streaks of brilliant sunshine
which, by contrast, made the greenish depths about them all the more
mysterious and inviting. From their position they could see the water
bubbling and rippling past the moss-covered rocks that jutted above the
surface, its never ceasing melody occasionally broken by the chattering
of birds. Over the air, like incense, floated the fragrant perfumes of
the thicket and the faint odor of the fresh cool water.

“How delightful,” mused Dave, in dreamy tones.

“I wonder if it’s safe to leave our mustangs over yonder,” remarked
Sam, reflectively.

“I wonder if Bob and Tom will have any trouble in finding that young
pianist again,” said Don.

“And I wonder if the mosquitoes will allow me to take a short siesta,”
murmured Dave. “This is certainly a capital place to study insects at
first hand, eh, fellows? Really, since seeing so many of varied kinds,
I’m becoming interested in the creatures.”

“And I know that a good many of varied kinds have paid such keen
attention to my face and hands that they must have been greatly
interested in me,” chuckled Sam. “Gracious--I can’t keep my eyes from
blinking!”

“Lazy thing,” drawled Don, in muffled tones.

Under the influence of the heat, the soft lulling notes of the running
water, and fatigue, due to several hours in the saddle, the three lads
were soon in a pleasantly somnolent state which made the things about
them assume a curiously vague and unreal appearance. Probably but for
the mosquitoes and the occasional visitation of other six-legged
creatures, all would have quickly dropped off into a deep slumber,
though, as it was, none lost consciousness for more than a few minutes
at a time.

It was the usually active and alert Sam Randall who finally became
aware of the fact that a series of sounds in the underbrush might mean
something worth investigating.

“Hello! What’s that?” he murmured.

Sitting up the lad listened attentively, while his companions, their
faces partly covered with handkerchiefs, lay drowsily regarding him.

“It’s mighty queer,” mused the Rambler. “Some wild inhabitants of the
woods are evidently bound in this direction--the sounds are growing
louder,--Dave--I say, Dave!” he reached over and touched the stout
lad’s shoulder. “Wake up.”

“Lemme be,” protested the historian.

“If I do, something else may not,” returned Sam, rather grimly.
“Visitors are on the way--don’t you hear them coming?”

Dave did, and he rose to a sitting posture so abruptly that Don at once
followed his example, at the same time demanding in a startled tone:
“For goodness’ sakes, what’s the matter?”

“Nothing just now, but there may be soon,” responded Sam cheerfully.
“Dave, I guess Tom would be horrified at the thought of our being
guilty of such an amateurish proceeding--all of us almost going to
sleep at the switch.”

“Say, that sounds like a big bunch of something!” broke in Don, peering
eagerly in the direction from whence the sounds of snapping twigs and
loud rustling were coming. “What--what can it be--oh--Great Scott--look
there!”

Several animals, resembling hogs, had suddenly emerged into view from
behind a tangled mass of vegetation, and behind these were evidently a
great number of others.

“Peccaries!” remarked Dave, briefly. “Fellows, I think we’d better be
on the move.”

“Peccaries!” echoed Don, with a little tremor of alarm. He gazed at
the animals with fascinated attention. Never before in his life had he
seen any wild animal larger or more dangerous than a jack-rabbit, and,
somehow, he felt thrilled at the sight of these savage denizens of the
woods. He rather wondered, too, at the calmness of both Dave and Sam.

The peccary, with its big head, long snout and small ears, is not a
handsome animal, and the actions of these particular specimens made
them look still less attractive to the New Orleans lad.

“By George, fellows!” he blurted out suddenly, “they’re coming this
way!”

As he spoke the leader of the advancing horde, a large, vicious-looking
beast, uttered a peculiar, challenging grunt and increased his pace,
whereupon the three began a hasty retreat.

“We’ll give ’em all the room they want!” panted Don.

The peccaries were now pouring into view in great numbers, pushing
through and scrambling over obstructions with an apparent ease that the
lad for the moment heartily envied.

“Ugh! what ugly looking customers!” he exclaimed, casting a quick
glance over his shoulder. “And they actually have the nerve to follow
us. Can you beat it?”

“I’m doing my best!” grinned Sam.

By this time the peccaries, probably emboldened by the precipitous
flight of the boys, were pursuing them, and with an earnestness that
caused Don to experience feelings of great uneasiness.

In a few minutes the three found themselves separated, and the New
Orleans boy, to his great disgust and alarm, made the unpleasant
discovery that the leader and several others had singled him out for
special attention. Paying not the slightest heed to the branches and
twigs which continually lashed his face and shoulders with stinging
force he made progress at a rate of speed which a short time before
he would have considered impossible. And every glance that the lad
gave toward the solid, stocky wild Mexican hogs, and their eyes, which
seemed to express a most disturbing degree of savageness, acted as an
incentive for him to make still greater efforts.

“Gee whiz!” he breathed. “Maybe I won’t be jolly glad to get out of
this!” He shuddered at the thought of coming in closer contact with
the animals, though the revolver at his Belt served to bolster up his
courage.

Meanwhile both Dave and Sam were having a similar experience. The
Ramblers, however, more accustomed to situations in which courage and
resourcefulness played a most important part, did not feel any of the
thrills of alarm which assailed their companion. To them there was an
element of grim humor in this retreat before the advancing horde of
wild hogs.

“We might lead ’em right over to the Ranger encampment,” chuckled Sam,
“and----Great Scott!”

A loud shout coming from Don Stratton abruptly brought his sentence
to a close. The lad had been succeeding admirably in keeping his
lead, when a projecting root unfortunately caught his foot and sent
him sprawling into the midst of a mass of bushes. It began to look as
though the foremost of the peccaries would be upon the lad before he
could extricate himself from his unpleasant position.

“Keep cool, old chap!” yelled Dave. “We’ll be over there in another
moment!”

Both lads began struggling toward him with an energy and determination
that sent the perspiration streaming over their faces.

“I guess this thing has gone far enough!” panted Dave. “We’ll give them
a jolly good scare!”

“It doesn’t pay to be too good-natured to peccaries,” said Sam.

Don Stratton passed through some decidedly unpleasant moments before he
was once more on his feet, and by this time Dave and Sam were not far
away, and neither were the wild hogs.

“Just leave them to us, Don!” cried Dave. “We’ve declared
war--no--don’t shoot--keep on moving!” Before he ceased speaking the
stout lad had drawn out his revolver. Don saw the weapon, its muzzle
pointed upward, flashing in the gray half-light of the woods. Then
came a spurt of vivid flame and a loud startling report which echoed
weirdly, while a thin wisp of bluish smoke floated lazily off among the
bushes.

“Hooray! hooray!” yelled Don.

The advance was instantly halted. Frightened squeals and grunts came
from the animals, some of which in their wild efforts to escape
scrambled over one another’s backs.

“Let ’em hear a few more!” shouted Don. Disregarding Dave’s shake of
the head he pulled out his own revolver and, with a newly-awakened
enthusiasm for sport, began blazing away. Crack! crack! In rapid
succession the shots rang out until every chamber was emptied and a
cloud of smoke hovered in the air.

Sam, with a broad smile, for good measure fired a single shot, though
it was not at all necessary, for the peccaries in full flight were
tearing and crashing through the underbrush, the noise of their passage
rapidly becoming fainter.

The boys watched until the last form was lost to view and then burst
out into a roar of laughter.

“Ha, ha!” gurgled Sam. “That fusillade sounded like a pretty good
imitation of a Mexican Revolution, didn’t it?”

“Well, rather!” cried Don. “Awful forward things, aren’t they? Gee!
but for that confounded root I’d have been all right.” His face wore a
vastly relieved expression.

“We have had another proof that naturalists speak the truth,” remarked
Dave. “They tell us that peccaries are often very bold, and attack
people without provocation--they do!”

“Yes,” grinned Don, “for we never said a single word to them.”

The three began forcing their way through the thicket, soon reaching
their mustangs. Leading the animals toward the edge of the woods
they were presently about to mount when Sam’s loud exclamation:
“Hello--look, fellows!” made his companions pause.

A distant horseman, riding at a speed which seemed to indicate that he
was in the greatest hurry, was riding over the plain.

The rider evidently observed the boys at about the same time for he
immediately changed his course, heading toward them.

“He doesn’t look like a bandit,” remarked Dave, with a smile.

“Nor a cowboy either,” said Sam.

“Nor a Texas Ranger,” supplemented Don. “Wonder why he’s in such an
all-fired rush--I don’t see any peccaries chasing him!”

Quite interested the three stared hard toward the approaching horseman,
uttering a hearty salutation when a short time later he reined up in
their midst.

He was a tall, stern-looking man, though the lines on his face were
relaxed by a curious smile as his eyes traveled over the group.

“’Pon my word!” he exclaimed, in bluff, hearty tones--“it must be--yes,
I’m sure of it--some of the Ramblers young Clifton told me about.”

“Good-afternoon, Colonel Sylvester,” said Dave.

A twinkle came into the colonel’s eyes; then with a sudden change of
tone he said: “Yes, that’s my name. Boys, you must have heard some
pistol shots a short time ago. Have you any idea where----”

“Yes, sir, we have,” spoke up Don with a chuckle.

“Peccaries!” explained Dave.

A broad smile illuminated the ranchman’s face as he listened to a
description of their experience.

“I was on my way to the Rangers’ quarters when a series of very faint
reports reached my ears,” he explained. “I judged they came from this
direction and hurried over, thinking that perhaps the Rangers were
having a scrimmage with a band of outlaws. Boys! I have a bit of news
for you”--the colonel’s face was beaming--“your friends are returning
to the encampment this afternoon bringing my nephew, Jimmy Raymond,
with them.”

“Fine, splendid!” cried Dave. “Ever since the boys told me about Jimmy
I’ve wanted to meet him.”

“And I’ll be jolly glad to see the pianist, too!” exclaimed Sam. “Yes,
sir--we’re going right over to the Rangers’ quarters now.”

“And I’ll bet Tom will have a whole lot to tell us,” grinned Don.

The lads sprang into the saddle, and followed the ranchman, who was
already cantering off.

The eight miles which lay between them and the Rangers’ hut was covered
at a good rate of speed.

Policemen Cole and Cooper were quite surprised to see Colonel Sylvester
swinging down upon their quarters and so expressed themselves.

“Too bad the Sarge isn’t here,” said Fred Cole. “What’s the latest
news, Colonel?”

“That Jimmy Raymond will be here shortly,” answered the ranchman.

Both of the Rangers were greatly pleased at this piece of news.

“It’s a mighty good thing,” declared Cole. “That country across the
river is surely no place for him.”

“No, indeed,” said the colonel. “And I owe Tom Clifton and the other
lad a big debt of gratitude for getting him safely away.”

“This is certainly some crowd of boys, all right,” laughed Cooper,
taking charge of the visitor’s horse.

As a rule Colonel Sylvester was not a man to show his feelings, but on
this occasion he made little effort to conceal his growing impatience.
Restlessly he paced to and fro while the men and boys busied themselves
in the preparation of the evening meal.

When the after-glow still lingered, touching up the landscape with
mellow notes of color, they all took their places around a crackling
bed of red-hot coals and began to partake of a meal, which, to
appetites sharpened by outdoor life, tasted wonderfully good.

The colonel was as much pleased with the boys as they were with him,
and he asked them many questions regarding their various trips.

“It’s a capital idea!” he declared. “Traveling broadens the mind, and,
besides this, through life you will always have pleasant memories to
look back upon.”

The light slowly faded from the sky; cooler shades began stealing over
the prairie, and dusk was fast approaching when over the air came a
sound which brought the ranchmen and the others instantly to their
feet--the faint clatter of horses’ hoofs.

“At last!” murmured Colonel Sylvester.

“Yes, I reckon they’re coming all right,” declared Roy Cooper.

Walking quickly to a point beyond the thick grove of cottonwoods the
entire party peered earnestly over the great stretch of plain, now
growing dim and mysterious in the rapidly waning light.

“Hooray! There they come!” cried Don.

Three horsemen, mere patches of dark against the somber background,
were seen approaching. On they came uttering lusty shouts, which,
leaving no room for doubt as to their identity, made the colonel give
vent to a few words expressive of the greatest satisfaction.

When the tired and dusty travelers at last clattered up, Jimmy Raymond
was the first to dismount. With a whoop of joy he sprang toward his
uncle and man and boy clasped hands.

“My! but I am glad to see you, Jimmy!” exclaimed the ranchman.

“Not any gladder than I am to see you!” cried the lad.

Yes, the meeting between uncle and nephew was a most cordial one. If
Jimmy Raymond had learned some valuable lessons by hard experience
the ranchman had too. The fact was brought forcibly to his mind that
sternness and unyielding insistence on obedience by elders over those
in their charge sometimes approach pretty close to the line of tyranny.
He was beginning to realize that Jimmy, like most boys, could be led,
but not driven.

He enthusiastically praised the Ramblers and told them he could never
thank them enough for the great work they had performed. Tom’s face
continually glowed with pride and pleasure.

Of course Dave and the others were astonished to learn about Cranny
Beaumont’s remarkable exhibition of self-denial and speculated upon it
with the greatest interest.

After a refreshing wash in the cool water of the creek the lads
gathered about the fire to enjoy a well-earned meal and tell their
stories. Naturally Jimmy Raymond’s came first, and when Colonel
Sylvester could think of no more questions to ask him, Tom launched
forth. And his graphic description of the events through which they had
recently passed brought many and varied comments from his intensely
interested auditors.

The colonel was highly delighted at the change which had come over his
nephew, and to hear of his resolution to return to Brownsville and work
hard at his studies.

“One good thing, anyway,” he remarked as they sat around the cheerful
blaze, now a little oasis of light amid the deep, somber shadows of
the night, “in taking you to be a boy, Jimmy, I discovered you to be a
man.”

Jimmy laughed heartily.

“Thanks, uncle,” he said. “And in thinking myself a man I discovered
myself to be a boy.”

“Say, if them two sayin’s ain’t pretty good, them there rustlers didn’t
turn another trick the other day,” remarked Roy Cooper.

Tom Clifton’s eyes instantly sought the colonel’s. His interrogative
glance brought a quick response.

“Yes, what you saw, Tom, was the work of those bandits. Quite a big
haul they made, too. My cattle? No! Some belonging to a live-stock
company.”

“And look here, Tom,” broke in Ranger Cole, “when are you going to join
Sergeant Howell’s detail over by the river?”

“We’ll start off the very first thing to-morrow morning,” cried Tom.
“Eh, fellows?”

And even Dave Brandon joined in the chorus of hearty assents that
followed.




CHAPTER XXV

CAPTURING THE “RUSTLERS”


For three days the detail of Texas Rangers under command of Sergeant
Howell had been encamped near the shores of the Rio Grande. They were
surrounded by a wilderness of precipitous bluffs and deep ravines, in
the shadowed depths of which the paths worn by wild animals, notably
the peccaries, or Mexican wild hogs, could be frequently traced.

It was a paradise for myriads of mosquitoes and other insects and among
them, lurking about in search of prey, was that deadly spider,--the
tarantula, always a menace to both man or beast.

And those three days had been scorching hot ones, when for hours at a
time not the faintest breath of air stirred the leaves or grasses. Yes,
the boys were fully satisfied now that the life of the Texas Ranger was
not an enviable one.

Tom had piloted the party to the place where he had come across the
prostrate steer. The animal had evidently recovered and wandered off to
other parts.

The Rangers, skilled in following the faintest trails, able to read
signs in nature which to an ordinary observer would have meant nothing
at all, had by tireless efforts found a passageway leading between
jagged hills to the Rio. Here were the unmistakable tracks of cattle,
hoof-prints clear-cut and comparatively fresh.

The deep chasms, overhung with dark beetling cliffs, led into a
cup-shaped valley, where tall grasses and rank vegetation flourished in
the greatest profusion. On the shores of the river, extremely shallow
at this point, were still other evidences to show that the Texas
Rangers had actually discovered at last the retreat of the outlaws.

“And we have Tom Clifton to thank for that!” exclaimed Carl Alvin.
“Without his help we might have searched around this rugged country for
weeks without finding a single trace.”

“You’re certainly right there,” assented Jack Stovall. “Now all we have
to do is to play a waitin’ game. Rustlers, an’ ’specially Mexican
rustlers, ain’t never satisfied. They’ll sure come ag’in.”

And the “waiting game” was being played. Stationed at various points
from where the cup-shaped valley could be observed, the men kept
vigil, often viciously attacked by hordes of ravenous mosquitoes. Hot,
tiresome and monotonous work it was, for the most part unrelieved by
comfort of any sort. But the hardy, courageous policemen of the plains
seldom uttered a word of complaint.

And with the exception of Don Stratton, neither did the boys. Don
emphatically declared that he had had all the roughing experiences he
wanted or ever would want, and after this little affair was concluded
that sort of life for him would be over forever.

“Don’t you believe it!” grinned Tom. “I’ll bet you’ll be out with us
again some time.”

For the entire three days the boys, Carl Alvin, Jack Stovall and Oscar
Chaney had had a little camp together in a pass so small that it was
with difficulty space could be found to quarter their mustangs. The
place possessed many advantages, however; it was wild and secluded,
and from a point part way up on the bluff they could see, between
a deeply gashed opening in the barren, rocky walls, a bit of the
cup-shaped valley, and beyond the “Rio Bravo.”

On the morning of the fourth day Tom Clifton, rolled up in his blanket,
was sleeping peacefully, when a light nudge on the shoulder suddenly
awakened him. Starting up with an exclamation, he saw Carl Alvin’s hand
raised in a warning gesture.

“Not a sound, Tom,” exclaimed the Ranger, in a scarcely audible voice.
“Come with me--bring your field-glass along.”

As effectually as though cold water had been dashed upon him, his
drowsy feelings vanished. Rising to his feet and throwing the blanket
aside, with field-glass in hand he followed the Ranger.

With all the precautions that Alvin took, Tom worked his way up the
slope, presently reaching the Ranger’s side. Eagerly his eyes were
turned toward the cup-shaped valley, to see something which brought a
faint exclamation from his lips.

Somber and dark against the water of the Rio Grande were the figures of
several horsemen. In a few minutes more they would reach the shore.

“Rustlers!”

The words, low and tense, were whispered in the Ranger’s ears. Carl
Alvin, his face stern and thoughtful, nodded: “It looks that way, Tom.
And we have them bottled up. The only thing to do is to nab them as
suspects and work up the evidence afterward. If they’re the guilty
parties, count on the Rangers to find a way to prove it!”

The Rambler, crouching behind the shelter of a shelving piece of
rock, raised the field-glass, and the moment his eyes took in the
riders under this changed condition he gave vent to a whistle of great
astonishment.

The man leading the advance was the benevolent-looking Mexican who had
ridden with him a few days before across the plains.

And so his hastily formed suspicions had been right! And Blimby, the
cowboy, had also guessed the truth!

So stunning was the surprise that Tom scarcely heard Alvin’s repeated
and impatient demands for an explanation. Through the binocular he
could plainly see the patriarchal-looking man, all unsuspicious of the
fact that human eyes were fixed keenly upon him, urge his dripping
horse up to the beach.

So, after all, he was one of the cattle rustlers. It gave him a great
thrill to reflect that he had ridden for miles and miles in the company
of an outlaw. It came as a distinct shock, too.

He revealed the nature of his discovery to Carl Alvin. The Ranger’s
eyes brightened; he, too, whistled softly.

“Too bad! too bad!” he murmured. “I liked the old chap so well! I can
scarcely believe it. This is a bad day’s work for him. In another
moment we must be off!”

Tom made no reply; he was too busily studying the other members of the
party. They were much younger men, strongly built, and had the same
refined appearance which characterized the leader.

“Which makes it all the worse!” thought the lad.

Alvin was now busily bucking on his cartridge belt. He turned to the
Rambler.

“You’d better keep out of this, Tom!” he exclaimed in earnest tones.
“Rustlers are a desperate lot and there may be a lot of gun play!”

“I’m going along,” answered Tom, briefly.

A half grin fluttered across the Ranger’s face, but it lasted only for
an instant.

“Now is the time when the Ranger force of Texas is going to perform
another signal service for the state,” he said. “How little those
fellows suspect they are bottled up!” He began to descend the slope.

The sleepers were awakened. There was no excitement, no alarm, either
on the part of boys or men. The expected had simply happened. That was
all!

Less than five minutes later a party of horsemen, Carl Alvin in the
lead, were picking their way through the winding ravines, with dark
gloomy crags hanging menacingly above their heads.

All arrangements having been made beforehand they halted at a certain
point and there they were almost immediately joined by the other
policemen. Now Sergeant Howell took command.

Those were thrilling moments for the boys. It was a dangerous game
they were mixed up in. What would be the outcome? Silently, with sober
faces, they followed the sergeant’s stern injunction to keep well to
the rear.

There was only one outlet to the less rugged country beyond and through
this the riders must pass. At the most favorable point for decisive
action the Texas Rangers halted.

“Not a word, men,” commanded Sergeant Howell, in a stern, cautious
tone. “Remember, don’t let one escape.”

The silent, motionless horsemen waited, their ears strained to catch
the faintest sounds which would tell them of the others’ approach.

The boys saw Alvin raise his hand.

Yes, they could now hear the steady beating of the horses’ hoofs.

Louder they came--still louder!

Around a bend swung the benevolent-looking Mexican. Close behind him
clattered the others. But a few paces more, and the policemen’s horses
sprang forward. Then the astounded Mexicans found themselves facing
a group of the famous Texas Rangers, every member of which had them
covered with a Winchester rifle.




CHAPTER XXVI

GOOD-BYE TO THE RANGERS


Stopping with a suddenness that sent the horses back on their haunches,
the men made no attempt to draw their weapons. After the first instant
of stunning surprise, they seemed to face the determined-looking
officers with singular calmness.

Carl Alvin’s loud order to halt, uttered in Spanish, was received
in silence, but the moment following, to the astonishment of all,
the benevolent-looking Mexican leader broke out in a hearty peal of
laughter, which was promptly taken up by the others, until the narrow
pass was filled with the echoes of their mirth.

What could it mean? Was it a trick to disarm suspicion, to throw the
policemen off their guard? If so, it had failed. Not a glistening
barrel was lowered.

Carl Alvin, the only Ranger who had a fluent command of the Spanish
language, began to speak. Rapidly he demanded explanations. They were
promptly given by the elderly man, who spoke in the most calm and even
tones, while Carl Alvin listened with a puzzled air which gradually
changed into another suggesting a mingled state of amusement and
elation.

“Well, Alvin,” demanded Sergeant Howell, “what’s the rigmarole all
about?”

“Sergeant,” the Ranger laughed heartily, “I don’t think we have the
right bunch after all. Listen. Here’s his story and it sounds to me
like a straight one.”

“Thunderation! but I shall be glad if he is all right,” almost shouted
Tom. He nodded to the Mexican, who, apparently noticing the lad for the
first time, returned his salute with an air of much astonishment.

In a few words Ranger Alvin related the following tale which was
listened to by all with the most rapt attention.

Formerly the Mexican and his sons, the men who were now accompanying
him, had been prosperous cattlemen. Under the lawless conditions
prevailing in their country a certain band of outlaws had managed to
make away with so many of their cattle that eventually the ranchmen
were practically ruined.

They knew the men responsible for the depredations and swore they would
keep on their trail until justice was meted out to them. Learning by
accident that the band had changed their scene of operations to the
United States side of the Rio, the father crossed the river in an
effort to get on their track. Meanwhile the sons’ investigations in
Mexico had led them to a spot on the shores of the stream where the
cattle had entered their own country. Then the men at last discovered
the pass in the hills which led to the cup-shaped valley. The rest was
easy. They had played the same game on the outlaws that the policemen
had on them, with the result that the band was driven back across the
river into Mexico and handed over to the proper authorities.

Every member of the band was now confined in certain quarters which
would effectually prevent him from giving either the ranchmen or the
Texas Rangers any further trouble for many years to come.

The Mexican said that he and his sons were on their way to the
detachment quarters of the Rangers to report this cheering information
to the authorities.

“Well, well, isn’t the Rambler Club always running into the most
remarkable things!” cried Tom; “eh, fellows?”

“No truer words ever spoken, Tom,” yawned Dave, “but really I must go
back now to see if I can’t get another as uncommonly comfortable nap as
the one I was having when this little excitement began!”

       *       *       *       *       *

Once more in the little frontier town in Texas the crowd met Cranny
Beaumont--a new Cranny--one they had never known before. They were
amazed and delighted. Yes, actually the Tacoma lad was hard at work; it
didn’t really seem possible.

Cranny didn’t intend to be a failure. Little things in life sometimes
turn the scale. The Tacoma lad’s meeting with Ralph Edmunds had been
the means of calling his attention to a line of work which thoroughly
appealed to him--that of corresponding for the newspapers. To Cranny,
long groping in the dark, it came as a great and welcome surprise. He
was not now the irresponsible Cranny, with no particular plans for the
future, but an earnest Cranny, working with a view and enthusiasm that
augured well for his future.

All the boys including Jimmy Raymond had gathered together in his room.

“Now you know, fellows, the reason why I didn’t go on that trip,” he
said. “Let me show you something!” He flaunted a check in their faces.
“That’s for some Mexican stuff I sold to the syndicate. Mr. Edmunds put
in a good word for me, and say,” it was now the bubbling, joyous Cranny
again who spoke, “I’ve got a whole lot of articles to write on the very
same subject. What do you think of that?”

There was no question of what they thought about it and Cranny smiled
with pleasure.

“Yes, Professor Kent, Parry and Edmunds came through that little
scrimmage all right,” he said, in answer to a question from Bob. “Parry
told me he got some dandy motion-pictures, and say--isn’t this the
greatest piece of luck?”

“What?” asked Sam.

“Why, young ‘Starlight’ was found, and is back in the stable.”

“Fine, fine,” exclaimed Tom enthusiastically. “Say, fellows, hasn’t
this been a great trip?”

“Do we ever have any other kind?” asked Bob, with a smile.




The Books in this Series are:


  THE RAMBLER CLUB AFLOAT
  THE RAMBLER CLUB’S WINTER CAMP
  THE RAMBLER CLUB IN THE MOUNTAINS
  THE RAMBLER CLUB ON CIRCLE T RANCH
  THE RAMBLER CLUB AMONG THE LUMBERJACKS
  THE RAMBLER CLUB’S GOLD MINE
  THE RAMBLER CLUB’S AEROPLANE
  THE RAMBLER CLUB’S HOUSEBOAT
  THE RAMBLER CLUB’S MOTOR CAR
  THE RAMBLER CLUB’S BALL NINE
  THE RAMBLER CLUB WITH THE NORTHWEST MOUNTED
  THE RAMBLER CLUB’S FOOTBALL TEAM
  THE RAMBLER CLUB’S MOTOR YACHT
  THE RAMBLER CLUB ON THE TEXAS BORDER




TRANSCRIBER’S NOTES:


  Italicized text is surrounded by underscores: _italics_.

  Obvious typographical errors have been corrected.

  Inconsistencies in hyphenation have been standardized.

  Archaic or variant spelling has been retained.

*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE RAMBLER CLUB ON THE TEXAS
BORDER ***

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the
United States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where
  you are located before using this eBook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

• You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation.”

• You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
  works.

• You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

• You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you “AS-IS”, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™'s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation's website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without
widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
